## **Rapid #: -22733606** 

CROSS REF ID: **496507** LENDER: **UAU (University of Calgary) :: Taylor Family Digital Library** BORROWER: **TMA (University of Memphis, University Libraries - TMA) :: Main Library** 

TYPE: Article CC:CCL JOURNAL TITLE: IJPAC. International journal of polymer analysis and characterization USER JOURNAL TITLE: International Journal of Polymer Analysis and Characterization ARTICLE TITLE: Determination of Polymer Heterogeneity by Two-Dimensional Orthogonal Liquid Chromatography ARTICLE AUTHOR: Krüger, R. P., VOLUME: 2 ISSUE: 3 MONTH: YEAR: 1996 PAGES: 221ISSN: 1023-666X OCLC #: 

Processed by RapidX: 6/19/2024 11:56:23 AM 

This material may be protected by copyright law (Title 17 U.S. Code) 

## **International Journal of Polymer Analysis and Characterization** 

**ISSN: 1023-666X (Print) 1563-5341 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/gpac20** 

## **Determination of Polymer Heterogeneity by TwoDimensional Orthogonal Liquid Chromatography** 

## **R. P. Krüger, H. Much & G. Schulz** 

**To cite this article:** R. P. Krüger, H. Much & G. Schulz (1996) Determination of Polymer Heterogeneity by Two-Dimensional Orthogonal Liquid Chromatography, International Journal of Polymer Analysis and Characterization, 2:3, 221-235, DOI: 10.1080/10236669608233912 

**To link to this article:** https://doi.org/10.1080/10236669608233912 

Published online: 24 Sep 2006. 

Submit your article to this journal 

Article views: 26 

View related articles 

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=gpac20 

© 1996 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) Amsterdam B.V. Published in The Netherlands under license by Gordon and Breach Science Publishers S.A. Printed in Malaysia 

Int. J. Polymer Analysis & Characterization 1996, Vol. 2, pp. 221-235 Reprints available directly from the publisher Photocopying permitted by license only 

## Determinationa it of Polymer Heterogeneitys by Two-Dimensies **o** nal Orthogonal Liquida a 

## R.-P. KRUGER, H. MUCH and G. SCHULZ 

Institut far Angewandte Chemie, Berlin-Adlershof (ACA) e. V., Abteilung Zentrale Analytik, Forschungsgruppe Polymercharakterisierung, Rudower Chaussee 5, D-12484 Berlin, Germany 

## (Received November 22, 1994; in finalform July 14, 1995) 

Liquid adsorption chromatography at critical conditions (LACCC) is a versatile method for the determination of different types of chemical heterogeneity in polymers, Coupling of LACCC in the first and size exclusion chromatography (SEC) in the second dimension is a useful tool to characterize polymers. Experimental problems of this orthogonal two-dimensional chromatographic method and applications are presented. Polyesters, polyethers and macromers are characterized according to their functionality and molar mass. Matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS) is an excellent method for identification of LACCC fractions and SEC calibration. The results of two-dimensional liquid chromatography are presented by a contour map (fingerprint of polymer). 

KEY WORDS Orthogonal chromatography, size exclusion chromatography, liquid adsorption chromatography at critical conditions, matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry, polyester, polyether 

## INTRODUCTION 

Polymers are heterogeneous in terms of their molar mass distribution and chemical composition, that is, distribution of functional groups, distribution of different monomers in copolymers, and sequence length distribution. Other aspects of heterogeneities in polymers concern topological or structural features, such as linear, graft, cyclic, star-shaped, dendritic, and random, block and alternating distributed parts of polymers. Nearly all high-tech or high-performance polymers are more or less heterogeneous. Their characterization is a challenge and is needed for optimizing synthesis and studying environmental effects and polymer recycling. One way for determining polymer heterogeneity is the application of liquid chromatography (LC). The coupling of different modes of LC [1-5] in a two-dimensional approach using optimized detectors provides a useful technique for determining polymer heterogeneity. ; It is well known that size exclusion chromatography (SEC), without interactions with the mobile or stationary phasés, separates according to hydrodynamic volume in an 

Presented at the International GPC Symposium, 1994, 

221 

222 

R.-P. KRUGER et al. 

entropic-controlled mechanism. In case of liquid adsorption chromatography (LAC), the separation is caused by interaction of the solute with the stationary phase in an enthalpiccontrolled process. The dependence of elution volume on molar mass is contrary in both these chromatographic modes. If the retention volume is independent of molar mass, liquid adsorption chromatography at critical conditions (LACCC) is realized. In this case the entropic difference of SEC in the separation process will be compensated by the enthalpic difference of LAC and the basic unit of the polymer chain is chromatographically “invisible”. In this case the retention depends on other structural differences of polymers, LACCC has the potential of separating polymers according to the above mentioned heterogeneities. 

Maximum information about the polymer system is possible using, in a two-dimensional chromatographic system (2D-HPLC) by on-line coupling of different chromatographic modes. Only by coupling orthogonal separating modes (e.g., LACCC and SEC), a “fingerprint” of the polymer will be realized. The aim of this contribution is to discuss the problems of 2D-HPLC and to apply this approach to polyesters and polyethers. 

## EXPERIMENTAL 

## LACCC System 

The first dimension in the 2D-HPLC polyester characterization consisted of a Jasco pump, type 880 PU (Jasco, GroBzimmern, Germany) in which acetone/hexane (50.5 vol%:49.5 vol%) was the mobile phase for critical conditions. For analyzing polyester samples, a 7- [im Si-120 silica column (Tessek, Praha, CS) was used. A refractive index detector (model 7511, ERC, Alteglofsheim, Germany) was used for determining the concentration of fractions. In the case of polyethers, a Macherey Nagel Nucleosil 5C18 column (250 x 4mm i. d., Diiren, Germany) was used. The mobile phase at critical conditions consisted of a mixture of water/acetonitrile (54 vol%:46 vol%), All LACCC columns were thermostated at 30°C. The concentration detector was an ELSD detector (Sedex 45) from ERC. The mobile phase was degassed by an ultrasonic bath. 

## SEC System 

The SEC measurements were carried out at ambient temperature. The system consisted of an HPLC pump 64 (Knauer, Berlin, Germany), two columns (300 x 8mm i. d.), 5-jim particle size, Knauer Eurogel GP 50 A and Knauer PL Gel 500 A for polyesters. In the case of polyethers, SDV 3-1m 100A (PSS, Mainz) and 5-um Knauer PL 50A were used. For the polyester analysis, the SEC columns acetone was used as mobile phase, polyethers were analyzed in THF/Lichrosolve (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). 

## MALDI-TOF-MS 

Kratos Kompact MALDI III equipment (Shimadzu, Duisburg, Germany) was used. Samples were prepared by mixing approximately 5uL of analyte in ethanol solution (Immol/L) with 5uL of a 60 mmol/L 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid matrix solution in 

2D-HPLC OF POLYMERS 

223 

ethanol. MALDI-TOF mass spectra were obtained with 337-nm radiation from a N,-laser as positive ion spectra in the reflectron mode, The equipment was calibrated with bovine insulin. The result of each spectrum was obtained from averaging 122 single shots. Spectra were evaluated using software provided by Kratos. 

Polyesters (PE) described in ref. [6] Were synthesized from: 

n* XCO(CH,), COX +n * HO (CH,). OH —— X [CO (CH,), CO O (CH2), O], H + (Qn-1) HX 

where X is Cl or OH and n = degree of polymerization. 

## Experimental Optimization 

Determining “Critical” Conditions. The realization of the “critical” point of polymer adsorption is possible by variation of mobile phase composition, temperature, and pH. For determining the “critical” point of polymer adsorption, it is necessary to investigate a number of samples with the same chemical structure, but different molar masses by variation of the composition of the binary mobile phase. Beginning with a thermodynamic good solvent in the SEC mode, one successively adds a thermodynamic poor solvent until the adsorption mode is reached. “Critical” conditions are realized when the retention volume of the main peak is independent of molar mass. 

Figures 1 and 2 show the possibilities of experimentally determining “critical” point. Figure 1 presents molar mass dependence of elution volume of different hexane/acetone mixtures. Figure 2 is a plot of log k’ of different molecular weight polyethers vs. volume fraction of acetonitrile in water. In the second case, it is necessary to determine t, from the exclusion volume of the LACCC column. The intersection of curves of different molar mass is the “critical” point of adsorption. 

In selecting a suitable stationary phase, it is necessary that the mean value of the pore size distribution must be greater than the hydrodynamic volume of the solvated polymer molecules in the “critical” mobile phase. It is better to work in an isocratic mode and to premix the mobile phase. Thermostating columns is necessary because the adsorption chromatographic process is highly dependent on temperature. 

Two-Dimensional Liquid Chromatography (2 D-HPLC). The realization of orthogonal working chromatographic modes is possible by coupling of LACCC and SEC (Figure 3). The first dimension of this coupling method is LACCC. Reasons and advantages are that the separation is independent of molar mass (hydrodynamic volume) of polymers; high polymer concentrations (10%) are possible without considerable loss of resolution; this method is fast since column dimensions are small compared with SEC columns. 

Coupling SEC in the Second Dimension. The mobile phase in SEC should be a component of the mobile phase of the LACCC, if possible. The number of columns in SEC should be small, but efficiency should be high, therefore, using of 3-ym particle size packing is attractive. The measurement time (run time) in SEC determines the sample transfer from the LACCC to the SEC mode. With two columns (300 x 8mm i. d.), 20 min are needed for a run; thus, the SEC 100-yL loop has to be filled in that time period. The pump in the LACCC mode must operate in the L/min flow range. 

224 

R.-P. KRUGER et al. 

**==> picture [266 x 142] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
4<br>3<br>>op 47hexaneVol %s | 49hexaneVol % hexane,53 Vol %<br>3.5<br>3<br>|<br>02 4 6 8 10 12 14 16<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Elution volume (mL] 

FIGURE_1__Determination of critical conditions: plot of log M,, versus elution volume of the peak of a HD-AA polyester with two OH groups. 

**==> picture [333 x 218] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
log k’<br>\ —™ - Mn 20 000<br>- 4—Mn 4000<br>\ - @— Mn 10 000<br>—w— Mn 1500<br>1 a\ —@—Mn 600<br>o— - ——=_ ee<br>NX ———_—_——<br>Ly _—_—__-—__________—_-9<br>— I, e<br>0.1<br>0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8<br>Volume fraction acetonitrile } water<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


FIGURE 2 Determination_of_critical conditions: plot of log k’ versus volume fraction of acetonitrile in ACN/H,O for investigated polyethers (k’ = (t-t))/t,). 

Detection. Evaporative light scattering detector (ELSD) is recommended in SEC because the second component of the mobile phase does not disturb the separation; it is not necessary to know response factors of different species for the determination of mass content. Calibration. SEC calibration is necessary for every peak separated by LACCC. Model polymers of the same molar mass range, and the first species of every homologous series have to be synthesized. For oligomers, it is possible to carry out the calibration by MALDI-TOF-MS. By assigning the main peak from the MALDI-TOF spectrum to the 

2D-HPLC OF POLYMERS 

225 

**==> picture [241 x 241] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
solvent<br>phase ES<br>sample<br>LACCC LACCC LACCC<br>i —<br>LACCC column<br>1 LACCC-valve injector SEC<br>2 SEC-vaive injector columns<br>(automatic electric}<br>SEC<br>detector 2<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


FIGURE 3 Experimental scheme of two-dimensional chromatography (coupling LACCC-SEC). 

peak maximum of highly resolved SEC chromatogram and counting of the other peaks, one can obtain a relation between elution volume and molar mass. 

Data Acquisition, Data acquisition was done by using 2D-HPLC software (Polymer Standards Service, Mainz, Germany). It is possible to present the results in a three-dimensional contour plot. Contour maps can be read like geographical maps. The y-axis corresponds to chemical heterogeneity and the x-axis corresponds to SEC elution volume or by calibration with molar mass; the relative concentrations of the components are indicated by colors. 

## RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

## Two-dimensional HPLC of aliphatic polyesters (PE) 

The aims of these investigations were the quantitative determination of cyclic species, the determination of molar mass distribution of different fractions, and the two-dimensional presentation of molar mass and functionality type distribution of polyesters, to study polycondensation kinetics and to differentiate the following different functionalities: 

Alk-PE-COOH HO-PE-COOH HOOC-PE-COOH Alk-PE-Alk HO-PE-OH Alk-PE-OH 

where Alk is an alkyl or alkylene group. 

226 

R.-P. KRUGER et al. 

The following secondary reactions by synthesis of polyesters are possible: 

## Dehydration 

---— CH, — CH, - OH ——>---—CH = CH, + H,0 

## Decarboxylation 

+» — CH, - CH, - COOH ——> ----— CH, — CH; + CO, 

## Hydrolysis 

---— CH, — COO — CH, —- + H,O ——>---— CH, - COOH + ---—CH, — OH 

## Dehydration 

## ---—OH + HO - ——>----O----+H,0 

Telechelic aliphatic polyesters were produced according to Scheme A by polycondensation, based on adipic acid and hexanediol (AA-HD) in various stoichiometric amounts to synthesize polyesters of different end group functionality. Figure 4 presents the LACCC of AA-HD polyester and of model polyesters with defined end groups. The separation of isolated diols after alkaline saponification in Figure 5 shows that these ether structures are incorporated into all polyesters, thus making identification of all species in the AA~-HD polyester possible. In Table I quantitative analysis of fractions are presented, measured by ELSD in the LACCC mode. These results are dependent on the molar mass. Without ether structures all side reaction products grow with increasing molar mass of polyesters. Ether structures results from hexanediol and can not grow during polycondensation process because the diol will be consumed. 

After preparative separation, all fractions and the first species of the homologous series were measured by SEC. The resulting calibration curves of all species are shown in Figure 6. The hydrodynamic volumes of species with different end groups are significantly different. The SEC runs of all fractions are presented in Figure 7. The 3D-contour plot, Figure 8, shows the “fingerprint” of the AA-HD polyester after calibration of every homologous series, in which the different shades represent concentrations. (In reality this contour plot is colored.) 

## Two-dimensional HPLC of Polyethers 

The optimization of the synthesis of macromers on the basis of ethylene oxide (EO) demand the characterization of the products according to chemical heterogeneity and molar mass. Scheme B shows the reaction scheme of this macromer. Components 1-4 were characterized by LACCC and SEC. A reversed-phase column was used because of the more hydrophobic properties of the end groups. The critical point for EO, the main chain unit, was realized by a mixture of 43 vol% acetonitrile and 57 vol% water (Figure 2). 

The LACCC chromatograms of the mixture and of the isolated substances are shown in Figure 9. To fingerprint the polymer mixture, the SEC system was calibrated for all compo- 

2D-HPLC OF POLYMERS 

227 

**==> picture [427 x 437] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
5 Pp ety=e <5||<br>. ags7<br>be 2 [8 = Fi e&ssi238<br>= oO _*»<br>|£ 3<br>7}25 3+, gga<br>3<br>wy, 5 i i<br>eA ale] | 85 i” eisHa<br>< ) | s -<br>aa<br>o 1S) +<br>eS 9 z<br>: BY, 3<br>Ale 4 ae<br>f | x+ 5 "33=<br>: | |io<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


228 

R.-P. KRUGER et al. 

**==> picture [263 x 380] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
50.0°-<br>JK tenn<br>0.000 6.00 10.00 16.00 man<br>200°<br>| HOOcC — COOH<br>100°<br>g.000 6.00 10.00 16.60 ma<br>° PC<br>0.000 6.00 10.00 15.00 mn<br>400 -mvV<br>200 Cycles<br>\<br>°<br>0.000 §.00 10,00 168.00 ma<br>mv<br>500 : Alk — Alk<br>°<br>0.000 6.900 10.00 16.00 - ma<br>mv =<br>100- 8 5<br>| x x ° 9<br>so. 5 £235 [8<br>| 2292/8<br>o- rz<br>0.000 6.00 10.00 15.00 mn<br>> retention time<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


FIGURE 4 LACCC chromatograms of AA-HD-polyester and of model polyesters with defined end groups. 

nents. The influence of the different end groups on the calibration curves was not negligible. The calibration was done using MALDJ-TOF-MS. Typical MALDI-TOF-MS of these four components are shown in Figure 10. The calculated data from this mass spectra are presented in Table II. With MALDI-TOF-MS, SEC calibration is simple. By comparison of mass spectra with well-resolved size exclusion chromatograms the main peak of the chromatogram can be assigned the corresponding molar mass from the mass spectrum. For lower molar masses, there are enough points to complete the calibration curve. The twodimensional HPLC contour plot of the polyether mixture after SEC calibration is shown in Figure 11. 

From this contour map it is possible to obtain information about the number of species, the relative concentrations and the molar mass distribution of all components. 

2D-HPLC OF POLYMERS 

229 

**==> picture [264 x 176] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
zee ae Diol after alkaline<br>wv saponification<br>8<br>9.990 5.08 19.60 18.00 min<br>100 mv<br>se! H [ O - (CHa).Jn- OH<br>|<br>°<br>6.000 5.00 10.00 18.90 min<br>mv<br>™ Polyester<br>6<br>2. 6¢0 5.08 10.99 18. ¢@ min<br>> LACCC retention time<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


FIGURE 5 Identification by decomposition reaction. 

TABLE I 

Mass content of different species of AA-HD polyester as a function of molar mass. 

||%||%|%|%||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|molar mass<br>ofpolyesters|Alk<br>|<br>Alk|%<br>Cycles|COOH<br>|<br>COOH|COOH<br>|<br>OH|OH<br>|<br>OH|ak<br>—O—|
|1,000<br>1,500<br>2,000<br>3,500|0.22<br>1.28<br>1.15<br>2.11|0.54<br>1.64<br>1.81<br>3.22|1.21<br>5.14<br>4.89<br>10.13|1.33<br>7.70<br>6.07<br>11.53|76.80<br>76.32<br>76.44<br>59.64|16.95<br>11.84<br>10.25<br>9.57|



molar, mass 

**==> picture [199 x 191] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
+.<br>*,,<br>1000 Ye.<br>>. aay<br>‘ee Ye.<br>o .<br>rs<br>108<br>14 15 16 W 18 19 20 21<br>elution volume [mL}<br>O AA—HD<br>O (AA—HO}AA OKTAlk— Mk<br>& (HD—-AjHD = ® Cycles<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


FIGURE 6 SEC calibration curves of polyester fractions. 

230 

R.-P, KRUGER et al. 

**==> picture [362 x 515] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Fr. 8 oti<br>Fr. 7. ah<br>Fr. 9 \<br>Fr 6. WY H "<br>Frie — Dn<br>Fr. 3 a6<br>Fr. 2 , ‘ \ au<br>Fr i) . SEC<br>a ae A\<br>LACCC<br>FIGURE7 SEC runs of all fractions, separated by LACCC.<br>|<br>:<br>;<br>¥<br>wo. ,® ¥ ' | |<br>|4<br>|' |<br>03 04<br>FIGURE 8 2D-HPLC contour plot of AA-HD polyester. The y-axis is functionality from LACCC and the<br>x-axis is molar mass from SEC.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


2D-HPLC OF POLYMERS 

231 

**==> picture [355 x 387] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
é$a1  ©£ Ls . ft_¥ :%: a i= §g<br>om, uO g yi! e g--—!!<br>ge |# § I ~) ! 3<br>| | #+ ; 8i] ¢ i | 2<br>ge " gle 3<br>é ; + i |e<br>f omo f-0o~9 8 g<br>8 |g 7 Is 5 S<br>eife § |s i<br>’ cite tPF Gg<br>I ox. é = ie) | [ EB :<br>oO ob g 2 = FY f g FI<br>=|? | |& Q S tT |@ 8<br>O| ¢# # |Z ei ¢ 7 3 a<br>3 elegy} 4 i:<br>7 w I | (3 wl? - £ a a<br>z¥ J cArHi r |§ &<br>< * asl ime<br>= 3s N és 3<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


232 

R. -P. KRUGER ¢7 al. 

**==> picture [51 x 11] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
HALLE\PESD.LI<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**==> picture [342 x 530] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
48, i, ° e<br>22. Q cm, omy<br>0 _<br>8.08 5.@ 16.08 15.8 22. 08 min<br>HALLE\PEGM.LI<br>:ai<br>@.08 5.8 18.20 15,8 28.08 min<br>HALLE\PEGMON.LI<br>18 —_—<br>0.8 5. 18.88 15.0 28.08 min<br>HALLE\PEG.LI<br>fe Eero ok]<br>8.08 5.8 10,00 15.08 20.0 min<br>HALLE\PEGMAP,LI<br>2.8 5. 0 18.08 15,08 28.08 min<br>FIGURE 9 LACCC of investigated polyethers.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


2D-HPLC OF POLYMERS 

233 

**==> picture [345 x 535] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
tinct.<br>TSS<br>1365<br>7 j a3).; ie 1009.2 ';<br>an<br>1. 148.3 “ 1097.3 a<br>oe 101-5 | 1uan.s<br>ba i | 1195.4<br>0 657.4 j F 1229.5<br>” $13.2 3273.3<br>” 569.2 tay?<br>" Me ye90.8 ase2.<br>o soo 600 700 v0e $00 1000 1190 1200 3300 1400 1s00 1600<br>‘Int.<br>759.0<br>100<br>% 715.0 802.1 ,<br>on, —o f-on,—ong—o}-n BF<br>r) orp. 046.9 . |<br>o 627-0 a91.2<br>3 93$.4<br>e $03.9 | v3<br>x $39.6 .<br>* i 1m) ast.<br>a1. | 1188.6<br>10o fone Ganon493.0 value N Jeet | eae | A i fi i if A | A i Alljo artieaaaNet pal in ubo n ce<br>«00 500 600 700 600 900 1000 3100 1200<br>‘Inc.<br>1092.5 ° ;<br>1000 iiat.e ony —0 fom —on,—o} U_emom<br>1004.4 1224.9 . —_—" :<br>be 960.6<br>20 1268.9<br>0 916.7| 1913.9<br>ad 872.9 1997.1<br>°<br>028.5 1681.3i;<br>” j 1468.7<br>2 746.3 1409.7<br>740-1 4532.5<br>19 696-8 1621.4<br>° 700 #00 900 1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1100<br>tint.<br>nar 3 7<br>100 1087.2 e ° ;<br>90 1013.1 1189.1 tn, x¢—t—0 fom —on—0 }e—emon,<br>a0 1233.2 hy : 4bail allj<br>70 969.5<br>*o 925.2 | 1277.3<br>30 H 1321.3<br>o !<br>” @6y.3 Hl fl : 1368.2<br>H i i 2409.2<br>2 097.2 f i 1652.5<br>- f 15n8.3<br>1 793.3 f | | 1497.2<br>wd PerteneceAsal Maeda la AU JUL JUAN GUA JUAN A ee<br>08 too 900 1090 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


FIGURE 10 MALDI-TOF-MS of end group modified PEG’s. 

234 

R.-P. KRUGER et al. 

TABLE II 

**==> picture [384 x 513] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Calculated data from MALDI-TOF mass spectra.<br>HO—OH CH,;—OH CH,—Ma Ma—Ma<br>Basic statistics<br>Monomer mass 44 44 44 43<br>Residual mass 18 32 12 22<br>Peaks 22 19 27 21<br>Weight averages<br>M, 917 756 1120 1097<br>M, 955 787 1157 1122<br>M, 990 817 1194 1148<br>Polydispersity 1.04 1.04 1.03 1.02<br>seggases&5 o 5 o<br>Ps i i ical i] i 4 1 re |<br>|<br>iy Ly i<br>PLLE-PEDMeP. 4 Start: Miz.34 10:49 (3) 4<br>8 |<br>«jin AL |<br>'[8|<br>} :& ;: |<br>| 4 ¢<br>8. 5.8 18,0 15.0¢ min |<br>Laccc |<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


FIGURE 11 2D-HPLC plot of endgroup-functionalized polyethers. The y-axis is functionality from LACCC and the x-axis is molar mass from SEC. 

2D-HPLC OF POLYMERS 

235 

## CONCLUSIONS 

To determine polymer heterogeneity, different species can be measured in the LACCC mode with ELSD as the detector. The knowledge of response factors of different structures is not required. If molar mass distribution of the peaks separated by LACCC is needed MALDI-TOF-MS can be applied to collected peak fractions. To determine the molar mass distribution of the whole polymer and the concentration of all species, it is necessary to use 2-D-HPLC, that is LACCC in the first dimension and SEC in the second dimension with SEC calibration by MALDI-TOF-MS. The last detector in this mode should be an ELSD. 

## Acknowledgements 

We are grateful to Ing. R. Laging/Fachhochschule Wildau, Ing. W. Wittke, and U. Dressel/Institut fiir Angewandte Chemie Berlin-Adlershof e.V. for providing measurements. The authors appreciate the cooperation and support of the following organizations and people: Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft; ERC (Alteglofsheim, Germany); Polymer Standards Service (Mainz, Germany); Frau Prof. Sandner, Martin-Luther-Universitat (Halle, Germany). 

## References 

1. S. G. Entelis, V. V. Evreinov, and A. V. Gorshkov, Adv. Polym. Sci., 76, 129 (1986). 

2. G. Schulz, H. Much, H. Kriiger, and C. Wehrstedt, J. Lig. Chrom., 13, 1745 (1990). 

3. A. V. Gorshkov, H. Much, H. Becker, H. Pasch, V. V. Evreinov, and S. G. Entelis, J. Chromatogr, 91, 523 (1990). 

4. H. Kriiger, H. Much, G. Schulz, and C. Wehrstedt, Makromol. Chem., 191, 907 (1990). 

5. H. Pasch, H. Much, G. Schulz, and A. V. Gorshkov, LC GC Int., 5, 38 (1992). 

6. R. -P. Kriiger, H. Much, and G. Schulz, J. Lig. Chrom., 17, 3069 (1994). 

