## HIGH MOLECULAR COMPOUNDS, Series A, 2000, volume 42, no. 6, p. 915-926 a a POLYMERIZATION UDC 541.64:547.39 STRICTLY MONOFUNCTIONAL POLYETHYLENE GLYCOL METHYL ETHERS AND METHACRYLATE MACROMONOMERS BASED ON THEM" 

© 2000 K. S. Kazansky*, G. Lapienis**, V. |. Kuznetsova*, L. K. Pakhomova’, V. V. Evreinov*, S. Penczek** * Institute of Chemical Physics named after. N.N. Semenov Russian Academy of Sciences 117977 Moscow, st. Kosygina, 4 

**Center of Molecular and Macromolecular Studies Polish Academy of Sciences, Sienkiewicza 112, 90-363 Lodz, Poland 

Received by the editor on October 28, 1999. Accepted for publication on January 12, 2000. 

PEG monomethyl ethers with M = 2000 and 5000, free from PEG impurities, were obtained by the method of “living” anionic polymerization of ethylene oxide under the action of triethylene glycol methyl ether alkoxide. Their molecular characteristics and purity were determined using gas-phase osmometry, IR spectroscopy, H NMR, and liquid chromatography under critical conditions. In terms of the content of PEG monomethyl ethers (96.8-99.4% according to NMR data), the synthesized polymers are close to those obtained by chromatographic purification of their commercial analogues (97.1-99.9%), which initially contained up to 25% PEG. Macromonomers with functionality not exceeding 1.0 were synthesized by methacrylation of homogeneous PEG methyl esters. Preliminary experiments have shown that their polymerization leads to soluble polymers, whereas in the case of macromonomers obtained from commercial PEG methyl esters and containing a branching dimethacrylate, cross-linked polymers are formed. Preliminary characteristics of soluble products are given. Their hydrodynamic parameters in an aquatic environment are consistent with the compact presumably star-shaped shape of macromolecules, and the number of rays 

for different samples ranges from 25 to 120. These estimates are close in order of magnitude to those made previously based on the elastic behavior of PEO hydrogels, in which similar star-shaped fragments play the role of network nodes. 

Ethylene oxide polymers, available in a variety of a serious drawback, however, is the rather a variety of modifications with a wide variation in length high content of PEG, which when synthesized on their we chains, number and nature of end groups, often basis gives significantly less definite reused as intermediates results, especially in the case of multifunctional in polymer synthesis [1, 2]. Particularly attractive "eagents. To a large extent this relates to PEG reactions are useful in this regard also applies to PEO macromonomers, since when they groups of which allow you to obtain many obtained by functionalization of PEG is formed figurative derivatives, including those with biological admixture of bifunctional oligomers, which in skiy active fragments [3, 4]. When conditions of subsequent polymerization leads the need for the synthesis of monofunctional adtoe Poymer meer products are most often used commercial models MPEG heterogeneity in functionality PEG namely ethers (MPEG) with sufficient has become the subject of a number of details in recent years - wide range of mm (from 350 to 5000). Their sestudies in which different analytical ' This work was carried out with financial support from the by meni methods the fugue os has been aimee Russian Foundation for Basic Research (project code —@ Significant (up to 30%) share of PEG, increasing with 98-03-33325). increasing MM [5-8]. The reasons for this vary 

915 

2* 

916 

KAZANSKY and others. 

The similarities are quite clear, since under the conditions of the Ethylene oxide (EO, Aldrich) was kept above CaH at synthesis of monoesters by anionic polymerization, the room temperature, thoroughly degassed and stored ina water present in the initiator or, rather, in the monomer should glass ampoule equipped with a Teflon Rotaflo® stopcock. generate bifunctional macromolecules, which upon The dosage of EO into ampoules for deactivation are converted into PEG. We analyzed this polymerization was carried out by volume from liquid issue earlier in connection with the synthesis of PEG of measuring cups or by pressure when freezing EO vapor from a given molecular mass [9] or monofunctional PEG a calibrated volume. In both cases, the amount of OE was derivatives [10]. There are attempts to create determined by weighing. commercial brands of MPEG that do not have this drawback. Thus, work [8] mentions MPEG (M-PEG 5000 low-diol, . ; , ; ; Union Carbide Chem. Co.), which, according to various Methacrylic acid chloride, triethylamine and benzene methods, contains from 0.6 to 2.1% PEG. used in the methacrylation of MPEG were purified as described in [16, 17]. At the same time, it is well known that “living” anionic Synthesis MPEG polymerization of ethylene oxide (EO) makes it possible to a Ts F ‘ obtain molecularly homogeneous PEO with a high and specified Polymerization of OE was initiated with a starting MW [11-13]. The term “homogeneous” is used in this case ‘Mixture containing MPEG and its alcoholate (about only in the sense that the polymer has a characteristic 20%), which was prepared in two ways. In the first of narrow MWD and does not contain macromolecules of a different type of them (method !), a weighed portion of potassium metal functionality than the intended one. There are many _WS dissolved in a dosed amount of MTEG, after which examples of this type of syntheses. the mixture was evacuated until gas evolution ceased. In method ll, KOH was used to synthesize the alkoxide, which was dissolved in MTEG, continuously stirring the mixture at 80°C until the release of water vapor stopped in vacuum. Another approach that allows one to achieve __ The final drying of this mixture was carried out the same goal is the purification of commercial MPEG by __ by double azeotropic stripping with benzene and a final chromatographic methods under conditions where. deep vacuum. separation occurs predominantly or exclusively by functionality rather than by molecular weight. The principles of such separation are formulated in [14]. OE was dosed into glass ampoules with a capacity of about 20 ml with the prepared starting mixture, the ampoules were sealed and kept in a liquid thermostat at the Thisaim articleof elucidating containsthe thereal resultspossibilities of a studyof anionic undertakenpolymerization with 70°C and shaking for 2.5-5 hours. of OE in the preparation of homogeneous MPEG as ; a intermediate products for the subsequent synthesis, for After completion of polymerization, which in all cases examole, of strictly monofunctional macromonomers. Another was quantitative, the ampoules were opened, and the part of this work, devoted to thexon: resulting polymer was dissolved in water. The chromatographic purification of MPEG from PEG __ ‘resulting solution was purified by ultrafiltration (Amicon impurities, is published in parallel [15]. Stirred.Cell with a membrane at M = 1000) and then passing through a cation exchange resin in acid form, after which the polymer was isolated by freeze drying. 

## EXPERIMENTAL PART 

## Starting materials 

Synthesis and polymerization of macromonomers PEO macromonomers containing methyl and methacrylate groups at the the ends of the the chain, respectively, were obtained by analogy with work [16] by the the direct reaction of the. OH groups of MPEG MPEG with methacrylic acid chloride in benzene in the presence of triethylamine. triethylamine. In order to to increase the degree of functionalization, functionalization, the molar ratios of acid chloride and triethylamine to OH OH groups were increased to 2.5-4.0. Completeness of response and functionality, 

Triethylene glycol monomethyl ether (MTEG, Aldrich) methacrylate groups at the the ends of the the chain, respectively, were obtained was distilled three times over Na in vacuum (about 90°C/4 by analogy with work [16] by the the direct reaction mmHg). According to liquid chromatography data OH groups of MPEG MPEG with methacrylic acid chloride (Hewlett Packard 5890, temperature program: 10 _ in benzene in the presence of triethylamine. triethylamine. In order to to degrees/min in the range 50-220°C), it contained increase the degree of functionalization, functionalization, the molar no more than 1% impurities. MOTEG was dosed into of acid chloride and triethylamine to OH OH groups reaction ampoules in an atmosphere of dry Ar. increased to 2.5-4.0. Completeness of response 

HIGH MOLECULAR COMPOUNDS Series A Volume 42 No. 6 2000 

917 

## STRICTLY MONOFUNCTIONAL METHYL ETHERS 

The functionality of macromonomers in methacrylate groups The functionality of macromonomers with respect to was monitored by UV spectrophotometry after double |= methacrylate groups was determined from UV spectra precipitation of the polymer from benzene with according to the method in [16]. In addition, ina ~ heptane. number of cases, the MW of the resulting MPEG and macromonomers was controlled by the viscometric method, as Radical polymerization of macromonomers was carried described in the same work. out in an aqueous medium under the action of the Mass spectra of polymers in the MALDI-TOF-MS K2S200-Na2s203 Syston (1 4-2.2 mmol/L of each version were recorded ie a Voyager Elite Tm device component, 30°C) - 4,4 -azo-bis-4-cyanovaleric acid using dihydroxybenzoic acid with the addition of Nal as _ ( O05 Ini G0rG).. The patymer pancenByon. ID a matrix; Insulin was used for calibration (M = 5735). the experiments Was 5-20 wie "te eller polymerization, te Samples were prepared according to standard methods. reaction mixture was diluted with water, dialyzed against water (Sigma D 7884 bags), and then freeze-dried. In a number of cases, the resulting product was again dissolved To evaluate the molecular characteristics of the in benzene, filtered, precipitated with excess heptane, and polymerization products of macromonomers by GPC, we used an LKB dried in vacuum. chromatographic system with water as an eluent, PSS Suprema-Gel columns (30, 100 and 1000 A, 8 x 300 mm each) and Refractomonitor IV LDC and Wyatt Dawn DSP laser detectors photometer To analyze the Polymer Characterization Methods chromatograms obtained with a light scattering detector, the ASTRA 4.70.07 program was used. Columns were calibrated Number-average MMs were determined using a Knauer __ using a Set of standard PEOs in the range M = 6 x gas-phase osmometer (model 1993) in CH2C12 at 102-9.6 x 105; the calibration was described by a 26°C according to the standard procedure. third-degree polynomial. H NMR spectra were recorded on Bruker AC (200 MHz) and MSL (300 MHz) spectrometers with RESULTS AND ITS DISCUSSION CDC13 as solvent. For the purpose of quantitative determination . . . . of the cantent of OH qrouns, we tised triflunroacetic The main problem in the synthesis of strictly anhydride (TFA), introduced directly mono-functional PEO derivatives by - into the ampoule in a fivefold excess relative to OH groups. anionic polymerization of OE is the exclusion of any This method was previously tested on the analysis of uncontrolled co-initiators, in particular bifunctional ones, which terminal OH groups of PEG [18] and generate macromolecules growing from poly-e-caprolactone [19]. both ends, which, upon their subsequent deactivation, leads to the formation of PEG impurities . The main source of these IR spectra were recorded on a Bio-Rad FTS-7 complications is, of course, the water present in the monomer Fourier transform IR spectrometer in TTP as a solvent. The or in the initiating monofunctional mixture. OH group content was determined according to [20], using an absorption coefficient of 147 I/mol cm at 3490 cm-1, determined by calibration against reference PEGs. Analysis of this this issue shows that it is required 

cm-1, determined by calibration against reference PEGs. Analysis of this this issue shows that it is required The requirements for moisture content in the reaction mixture become more and more stringent as the planned MPEG analysis using liquid chromatography under _ molecular weight of the polymer increases. For example, critical conditions was carried out by analogy with work [21] in the synthesis of monofunctional PEG derivatives with using a Waters-590 chromatograph with a Waters-410 M = 2000 and 5000, which were the goal of this work, an refractometric detector and a Lichrosorb-10 RP-18 admixture of 1% PEG corresponds to a content of column. A mixture of CH3CN-H2O (60:40 by volume) was about 0.01-0.004 wt. % H20 (0.005-0.002 mol/l), used as an eluent at a flow rate of 1 ml/min. Samples witha _ respectively, which is easily achievable by drying the monomer over volume of 10 pl had a concentration of 5 mg/ml. The CaHz and using vacuum technology. The choice of retention volumes of PEG and MPEG under these method for preparing the initial, so-called starting mixture, is conditions were 2.98 and 3.25 ml, respectively. A slightly also determined by these criteria. The most precise is the modified version of the same method was used to direct reaction of the required portion of the metal with characterize commercial and chromatographically alcohol, although the dissolution of KOH with thin water in a purified MPEG [15]. vacuum or with a benzene azeotrope turns out to be quite acceptable for not too high 

HIGH MOLECULAR COMPOUNDS Series A Volume 42 No. 6 2000 

918 

KAZANSKY and others. 

Table 1. Molecular characteristics of PEG monomethyl ethers 

|Sample|«||OEMTE,<br>mol/mol|calculated" |QGaS phase<br>osmometry|calculated" |QGaS phase<br>osmometry||MRI|IRspectroscopy|OH:CH3<br>(NMR)||liquidchromatography|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|A||Fluka|2000|2445|2500|-|-|1.53|79.0|81.2|
|8||Fluka|2000|1825|2038|-|-|1.01|99.5|-|
|B||43.1|2060|2570|2125|0.97|0.96|1,01|99.4|95.5|
|Cc||44.8|2135|2360|2280|0.94|1.01|1.01|99.3|97.0|
|d||41.0|1970|2420|2045|0.96|0.96|1.05|98.5|97.4|
|ano||Sigma|5000|5105|5210|-|~|1.60|73.5|75.1|
|J||Sigma|5000|4329|5193|-|-|1.00||~100|-|
|3||109.4|4980|5280|$135|0.97|0.87|1.06|97.2|98.3|
|||108.9|4965|4845|4875|1.02|1.11|1.10|96.8|97.9|
|K||114.7|5210|5300|5115|1.02|-|1.04|98.2|95.7|



* Commercial samples A, B, E, G, including those purified by chromatographic method (B, G); synthesized samples: method | (D, K), method I! (B, D, H, |). For samples A, B, E, G, the manufacturer is indicated in the next column. ** Calculated from the. OE/MTEG ratio: M = 44.05 (OE/MTEG+ 3); for samples A, B, E, G the nominal MM is given. ***Average functionality for OH groups per MM measured osmometrically. 

MM. Previously, using the example of nitropheny! products, during the final evacuation of the system before PEOs have shown that this technique is reliable - introduction of OE, as well as removal of low molecular weight but ensures monofunctionality of the product of the product fraction during ultrafiltration. Fromcom with MM up to 105 [10]. It is this proven Note that usually in such syntheses the experimental This methodology is used in this mental MMs are lower than calculated due to the inevitable work. th influence of random co-initiators. 

The data turns out to be very informative. Functionally homogeneous MPEGs In this case, NMR spectra. In light of these data Molecular characteristics— of the MPEG series,. productsconsider thewithcriteriaMPEGfor complianceformula of the received obtained by the “living” anionic polymer method rizations of OE are given in table. 1. For comparison purposes CH30CH2CH20(CH2CH20)2CH2CH20H It also contains data for some . C a (1) many commercial MPEGsin the initial state, and also after their chromatographic purification. in which the letters indicate the structural groups of . , protons. MM values of Firstproducts,of all,whichyou shouldare usuallypay attentionindicatedto Chain length information can be semi-; call to the level of control in synthesis according to the method chen directly from the NMR spectrum. Indeed, because "living" polymerization, where the MM is given in relation to | measurement of integrated signal intensities, mixing of the monomer and initiator. Comparison related to chain protons and terminal groups calculated and measured values of MM, given - CH3 and CH2OH (in the formula these are protons c, a and e correspondlisted in the table. 1 shows their approximate correspondence responsibly), provides such an opportunity. Spectra effect, although the measured MM, as arule,even NMR of individual mMTEG used in caslightly higher. This may be partly due to quality of the model, and one of the synthesized MPEGs trapped by loss of initiating monoester are shown in Fig. 1. 

HIGH MOLECULAR COMPOUNDS Series A Volume 42 No. 6 2000 

STRICTLY MONOFUNCTIONAL METHYL ETHERS 

919 

**==> picture [344 x 404] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
(a) e<br>a<br>b<br>d<br>PenSS... 2 a<br>4.6 4.3 4.0 32 3.4<br>(6) e<br>a<br>b<br>d<br>ee Oe a i ee oy<br>44 4.1 3.8 3.5 3.2<br>b, m.d.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Rice. Fig. 1. NMR H spectra of MTEG (a) and MPEG (b, sample D in Table 1) inCDC13 with the addition of TPA and a delay between pulses of 10 s. Ise 10 s. Letters indicate the assignment of signals to structural groups of protons in formula (1). Here and in Fig. 2-4 signal amplitudes along the ordinate axis are given in arbitrary units. 

Some difficulty lies in the fact that usually the signals of the protons of the CH2 group closest to the hydroxyl (e, 8 = 3.6 ppm) are located near the intense signals of the chain (c, b = 3.64 ppm), which is not allows for their correct integration. This problem is solved using various “shift” reagents, which change the state of the pre-terminal group, forming a strong hydrogen bond with the hydroxyl. (DMSO [5]) or a chemical compound (trichloroacetilysocyanate [6], TFA [18, 19]). It is with the use The spectra of Fig. 1 were recorded using the last of them. 1, 

which show the assignment of peaks to protous different groups. As you can see, the group signals |CH,OC(O)CF3 (8 = 4.45-4.50 ppm) significantly shifted are derived from circuit signals, which makes it possible to determine pour the ratio of these groupies, which is reverse polymer chain length. In the case of methyl proto_ new (a, 8 = 3.37 ppm) the same problem is solved electronically mentally 

MM values calculated from the ratio signal intensities of chain links and half-sum we end groups are presented in table. 1. How 

HIGH MOLECULAR COMPOUNDS Series A 

Volume 42 No. 6 2000 

920 

## KAZANSKY and others. 

Apparently, they are in even more satisfactory - NMR (Table 1), which only emphasizes the agreement with the calculation than those measured by gas-phase equivalence of both approaches. osmometry. og ” Thus, anionic polymerization of OE under conditions The second important structural criterion is the — excluding the participation of water as a bifunctional functionality of MPEG at both end groups. Obviously, it can co-initiator leads to practically individual MPEGs. The same be obtained from the ratio of the same signals, for or even better results can be achieved using preparative example, c and aor c and e. In Table. Figure 1 shows the functionality chromatography according to the recently proposed found from NMR spectra for OH groups (he). They method [15]. As analysis of the MPEG obtained in this appear to be in good agreement with Fourier transform case shows, the content of the main product in them, as a IR spectroscopy data. Note that the average component for rule, exceeds 99%; Two such examples with different MMs are all data, bon = 0.98 + 0.05, indicates that MPEG _— given for comparison purposes in Table. 1. It corresponds to formula (1) and the absence of a should not be forgotten, however, that the accuracy of the significant PEG impurity in them. functionality definitions themselves is unlikely to be higher than 1%. 

Finally, an even clearer criterion for such correspondence is the balance of both end groups in the polymer, directly determined from the NMR spectrum. It should be PEO methacrylate macromonomers and their noted that when analyzing the spectrum of MTEG, polymers which is an individual substance, this ratio turned out to be Functionally homogeneous MPEGs are, in turn, the alignilyincreasinghigher nan:the delayunily. ‘Te: betweenellminete fh'spulsesdacrepency(“relaxation, we used thedelay,” echniqueRD), ot basisimpurities. for theIn synthesisthis work,of otherthis possibility PEO derivativesis used free ofto obtain PEG spectrawhich-is*oftémUséd‘Wwherrécording NMR__ strictly monofunctional.methacrylate ofpolymers, the effect of which on the macromonomers of PEO that do not contain characteristic OH:CHS ratio in MOTEG is shown below. bifunctional analogues. Interest in such macromonomers is due to a number of circumstances. One of them is the recent synthesis of cross-linked PEOs by radical polymerization in an aqueous medium of their analogues with a RD.c 0 5 10 20 functionality of methacrylate groups (ma) from 1.2 to 1.8 , [16, 17]. The study of these networks showed that a [OH] (Sng 1.07 1.02 1.0 1.0 significant role in their behavior belongs to multifunctional branching units formed by polymerization of end groups. Subsequently, when recording spectra, we used RD = 10 s. It is natural to assume that in aqueous media The OH:CH3 ratios of the synthesized MPEGs (Table 1) __ hydrophobic polymethacrylate (PMA) chains should exist turn out to be very close to unity, which confirms the above in a folded, globular form, but neither the length of conclusion about their functional homogeneity. these chains (in other words, the degree of These are in striking contrast to similar data for polymerization of the polymacromonomer), which commercial MPEG, in which the balance of end groups is determines the functionality of the F unit, nor their the significantly disturbed by the presence of PEG impurities. It is clear actual state in the swollen network was not entirely clear. that the same relationships make it possible to Some idea of these nodes arose recently during the calculate the absolute content of MPEG, which theoretical interpretation of the elastic properties of such networks, and the estimated values also given in table. 1. The most direct method for analyzing oligomeric — we were about 200-300 [22]. systems with heterogeneous functionality is liquid chromatography under so-called critical conditions (1 4, It is natural to want to clarify these questions using soluble models obtained 21]; this approach was also used in this work. A by polymerization of strictly monofunctional macromonomers. comparison of the curves of commercial and These are polymers themselves, the shape of which can be synthesized MPEGs, shown in Fig. 2, itis hardly necessary _ varied between star- and comb-shaped by changing the to comment. The MPEG fractions found from such thermodynamic affinity of the solvent for chains of both curves turn out to be quite close to those calculated _ types, i.e. PEO and PMA represent independent from the spectra 

HIGH MOLECULAR COMPOUNDS Series A Volume 42 No. 6 2000 

**==> picture [451 x 394] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
STRICTLY MONOFUNCTIONAL METHYL ETHERS 921<br>hb 7<br>i a sen oe eeen<br>2 3 4 5 2 3 4 5<br>hh | \ |<br>a ee eeee A<br>z 3 4 S 2 3 4 5<br>Vyal, Jr<br>Rice. Fig. 2. Liquid chromatograms under critical conditions of commercial (a, c) and obtained by anionic<br>polymerization (b, d) MPEG with M = 2000 (a, b) and 5000 (c, d). a-d, respectively, samples A, B, E, | in table. 1.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


of particular interest, especially if we consider that general correlation with the molecular mass and functionality modern versions of “living” radical polymerization [23, of macromonomers, although independent quantitative determination 24] make it possible to obtain similar branched polymers of the same parameters from the NMR spectrum is not with a narrow MMP. entirely reliable. Nevertheless, for example, in the case of In ays macromonomer E (Table 2), calculating ma from the ratio of table Table 2 shows some characteristics _of the signals of the methacrylate group and agai and their radical polymerization PEO chain units leads to values of 0.94 + 0.08, while from Sa the ratio to the pre-terminal CH2 group (e in formula Macromonomers were characterized by molecular mass (1)) - to 0.98+0.06. and functionality, as was done previously in [16, 17]. The ; a ; oo. ; low value of functionality in the case of the G sample is Quite convincing evidence of the individuality of due to the small amount of initial MPEG and the macromonomers by type of functionality is provided by impossibility of achieving a high conversion of OH groups MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry; the corresponding spectrum is shown in Fig. 3 in comparison with the for purely kinetic reasons. spectrum of a typical MPEG. A preliminary analysis of the spectra (the accuracy of recording the t/g ratio in this In the H NMR NMR spectra of macromonomers, macromonomers, itis observed. _ region is no better than +1) shows that on this scale the manifestations of methacrylate groups are given given peaks are shifted from each other by 44 units, i.e. by the nals CH3 (centered at 1.41 ppm) and CH2 (at 5.6 MW of the PEO monomer unit. In the caseof[MPEG] and 6.1 ppm). At a qualitative level, intensive (spectrum a), the absolute mass values vary from 

In the H NMR NMR spectra of macromonomers, macromonomers, itis observed. manifestations of methacrylate groups are given given nals CH3 (centered at 1.41 ppm) and CH2 (at 5.6 and 6.1 ppm). At a qualitative level, intensive The strength of these signals is in accordance with 

; 

HIGH MOLECULAR COMPOUNDS Series A Volume 42 No. 6 2000 

922 KAZANSKY and others. Table 2. PEO methacrylate macromonomers and their polymerization products Macromonomers* Polymerization products of macromonomers** MA |sample 3 3 12 B 0.077 | 2040 0.89 Bt 148 74 255 128 - B2 100 50 185 93 37 AND 0.146 | 4850 0.98 He Cross-linked polymer E2 400 80 1040 208 50 ~ (5000) | 0.53 Xi 75 15 107 21 - ie 350 70 850 170 44 3 0.150 | 5030 0.95 31 191 38 564 113 48 32 292 58 357 71 - * For macromonomers, the same designations are used as for MPEG (Table 1), whereas for the products of their polymerization, the letter refers to the macromonomer, and the number to the number of the experiment on its polymerization. “ For polymerization products, the Mie values determined from the GPC curves, the number of branches in a star-shaped macromolecule, and the average radius of gyration are given, with RI and LS referring, respectively, to data obtained with a refractometric detector and a light scattering detector. In the first experiment, polymerization of this macromonomer was carried out under the. action ofthe K252082Na2S203 system at 30°C, in the second under the action of 4,4'-azo-bis-4-cyanovaleric acide 60°C. The polymer concentration in the experiments was 20 wt. %, excluding experiment E2, where it was equal refer to homologs of exactly this structure, carrying the In the caseof macromonomers with lower Na* ion from the matrix and having M = 55.03 + medium functionality (for example, F) mass44.0536n, where n is the degree of polymerization. For thespectrum is a superposition of both distributions example, for peaks 4771, 4815 and 4859 near the laziness, — MPEG and its methacrylate. Obviously, maximum, calculations using the formula lead to the en ne Bppicatod alps simian inane a eo values n =: 107.05; 108.05 and a109.05. Impurityms generation; of functionalization3 of; PEG in the presencei of appropriate lowOw intensity bel be judaed by its shiftfrom th the corresponding spectrum analysis program can main intensity Detlongs, as can be judged by is snitrom te _characterize the RTF function quantitatively series of peaks by 16 units, to complexes Of ~~ macromonomers, which is the subject of future macromolecules with current research. Available now in our K+, which was used in the synthesis. available GPC curves under critical conditions vibrations with dual detection (UV and refraction) In the case of a macromonomer, a series is observed _ tometry) show that during the synthesis of dimedipeaks, which is in excellent agreement with the PEG tacrylates with increasing conversion occurs formula of MPEG monomethacrylate (M = 123.11 + gradual shift of RTF from the original PEG by a hundred 44.0536 g); for example, peaks 5279, 5324 and ron of substituted products mono- and dimeta5368, again near the maximum, correspond to achain _crylate, but quantitative calculations based on these length of 117.04; 118.06 and 119.06. Inthe case ofa fragmentary data are premature. macromonomer, taking into account the accuracy of Movi t | t measurements, the result is quite comparable with. . sang tl polymacromonomers, we note viscometryx data (Table 2). Unfortunately, without havin eel: sagen aeSe fo i the ¢ hen: ¥ ee 9 ra E, obtained from commercial MPEG, acts appropriate program (as, for example, in [25]), we clearly leads to a cross-linked polymer, and when cannot calculate the MMP width from the mass spectrum, at lower concentrations, possibly to superhowever, selective estimates for some peaks show that it is branched polymer or microgel, which , somewhat wider than the Poisson distribution, which is due to the presencein it of a fairly high quite usual for practical syntheses of PEG esters. fractions of branching PEO dimethacrylate. Bysimilar phenomena occur at high con- 

HIGH MOLECULAR COMPOUNDS Series A Volume 42 No. 6 2000 

STRICTLY MONOFUNCTIONAL METHYL ETHERS 

923 

**==> picture [346 x 354] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
{a)<br>an | | |<br>ee<br>4000 4500 5000 =5500 SCm{z<br>(6)<br>)<br>|| |<br>1A| | Wa<br>| |<br>! ;<br>SS ee ee<br>4500 5000 5500 6000 m{z<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Rice. 3. MALDI-TOF mass spectra of a typical MPEG (a) and PEO macromonomer (6, sample 3, Table 2). The abscissa axis is given in units of the ratio of the mass m of the polymer homologue to the charge 2 at r = 1 (Na* as a charging ion). 

concentrations and in the case of macromonomer 3, in the rank in the work of recent years on polymerization initial MPEG of which there is a small admixture of | Macromonomers are predominantly used Peg. chromatography, which allows quantitative Under the same conditions, synthesis based on —-“haracterize polymacromonomers in the presence functionally homogeneous MPEG methacrylates leads vii of the initial macromonomers upon detection to soluble products, which allows them to be studied by methods ee ee er eo onenne oem accepted P y nu. A brilliant example of this approach is for branched polymers [26]. In this work, these products are Th ks [27. 28 preliminary characterized using ere are works [27,28]. ‘ . : exclusively To assess the MM and, if possible, the structure of the prousing GPC. The fact is that To determine the polymerization products of PEO measurements by stationary methods, for example . macromonomers, we used GPC with water as an eluent with the same gas-phase osmometry, light scattering or ViSCOcombination of detectors. In Fig. Figure 4 shows GPC curves zymetry require quantitative separation according to for some synthesized samples. lymacromonomers both from the original macromonomers ditch, and (in the case of a medium-numbered MM) from more low molecular weight impurities. This procedure In the first case (Table 2, sample B1) it is clear that the is very labor-intensive and requires significant conversion of the macromonomer is almost complete: the area under large amount of polymer. It is for this reason the polymer peak in the volume 

HIGH MOLECULAR COMPOUNDS Series A Volume 42 No. 6 2000 

**==> picture [529 x 207] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
924 KAZANSKY and others.<br>A (a) h ©) i (s)<br>i<br>|<br>{Wl i l<br>th HA { |<br>1 fy I |<br>If | |<br>i} | i tf |<br>|\<br>f\<br>i<br>s I oN HY<br>_ _—_—o Sa mer — SA ——_ a ae oe ”<br>es Ee es ee eS a a it eT pee ee Ba<br>15 20 25 30 35 15 20 25 30 35 15 20 25 30 35<br>. Vel, Jr<br>Rice. Fig. 4. GPC curves of polymerization products of macromonomers B1 (a), E2 (6) and Zh2 (c). Solid<br>curves refer to the refractive index detector, dashed curves to the light scattering detector.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


The area M = 2000 is no more than 10% of the total polymacromonomers lie statistically below 1/2 of the contentarea of the of thesample,initialwhichMPEGapproximatelyin the macromonomer.correspondsThisto the (s2)2-* (M)wefor linear: PEO. Estimates‘ from is even more obvious in the case of sample E2, which is these data lead, however, to the values of the branching factor g = (s2) obtained from a macromonomer with almost extreme — branch/(82) lin= 0.3-0.4 and, in turn, to the number functionality. Complete conversion is also characteristic of of branches of the order of 10-15 for irregular ones, i.e. macromonomer G (Fig. 3c), however, due to its polydisperse stars [26]. These data are inferior by low functionality, the content of residual MPEG in the almost an order of magnitude to the F values obtained final mixture is high (about 50%). directly from chromatograms. 

More rigorous calculations and speculations regarding — the sizes of macromonomers macromonomers formed during polymerization, presumably star-shaped PEO, are hardly justified at this level. It is known that, due to the the higher density of segments, segments, the degree of swelling of the the rays of polymer stars both both at the e-point, for which which most of the the equations used are valid, and far from it, is higher than than that of free free coils. As As a result, in water, which is a good solvent for PEO, PEO, their sizes sizes should approach each other, which reduces the calculated values of d. 

To estimate the molecular mass of polymerization — the sizes of macromonomers macromonomers formed during products asa first approximation, one can use the position polymerization, presumably star-shaped PEO, are hardly of the high-molecular-weight peak of the curve during justified at this level. It is known that, due to the the higher refractometric detection. As can be seen from the density of segments, segments, the degree of swelling of the the rays of table. 2, the degrees of polymerization of polymer stars both both at the e-point, for which which most of the the polymacromonomers obtained in this way are not too high. equations used are valid, and far from it, is higher than than Obviously, these values should be underestimated due to the that of free free coils. As As a result, in water, which is a good solvent significantly more compact conformation of branched for PEO, PEO, their sizes sizes should approach each other, which polymers in comparison with the coils of their linear reduces the calculated values of d. analogues used for calibration. This is confirmed by data obtained with a light scattering detector, where the absolute MMs turn out to be significantly higher. The very fact of such a discrepancy in MM seems to be serious, although Thus, although the available experimental data do not indirect, evidence in favor of the star-shaped branched allow us to strictly establish the conformation of macromolecules of structure of the resulting polymacromonomers. _ the products of radical polymerization of methacrylate macromonomers of PEO, they indirectly : indicate their star-shaped structure with the number of rays from 15 to 200. As noted above, this character oo Their The structure of these polymers in an aqueous compact conformation is indicated environment is due to the sharp contrast between the also the values of the radii of gyration hydrophobic polymethacrylate chains forming the star no matter how fragmentary 4/2 they are. For core and the hydrophilic PEO rays. It must be said that in the . KAW for li 4/2 case of PS polymacromonomers, even in a good comparison purposes, dependence (@2) ON or linear solvent, the authors of [27] are also inclined to believe that they was obtained by analyzing the high-molecular-weight part of have a star-shaped structure. the GPC curve for PEO with a wide MWD (M = 1.7 x 105; M/M = 2.5). Dimensions 

HIGH MOLECULAR COMPOUNDS Series A Volume 42 No. 6 2000 

925 

## STRICTLY MONOFUNCTIONAL METHYL ETHERS 

- In conclusion, it should be noted that 2. Harris JM. jf Poly (Ethylene Glycol) Chemistry. 

- al situation during radical polymerization New York: Plenum Press, 1992, macromonomers looks even more complex. 3. Topchieva I.N. // Uspekhi khimii, 1980. T. 49. No. 3. As can be seen, for example, from the same work on PSC. 385. macromonomers with methacrylate groups, 4. Topchieva I.N. // High molecular weight. conn. A. 1990. T. 32 the chain length increases sharply from 3-8 to , ne sp aco. ’ _ ee 30-70near 0.02at anmol/linitialdueconcentrationto the transitionof polymerizableto the gelgroupseffect 5. Dust J.M., Fang Z., Harris. J.M. // Macromolecules. region. This phenomenon becomes even more 1990. V. 23. Ne 16. P. 3742. pronounced in the case of high molecular weight _ 6. De Vos R., Goethals E.J. // Polym. Bull. 1985. V. 15. Ne macromonomers. The slowdown of the termination “6. P. 547. reaction in this situation is confirmed by direct measurements of the § concentration of macroradicals [P*] and death rate 2 Cogn 9. ease etic tb Miakroted. Cae ISE. constants k, duringé polymerizationHee of PS- ({P*]§ = 3.3 B. 189.; Ne8. P. 1809. ; x 10-6 mol/l, k, = 7600 I/mol s [ 29]) and PEO 8. SeliskoB., Delgado C., FisherD. }/J.[Chromatogr.][1993.] a V. 641. NO 1.P. 71. 

- macromonomers ([P*] = 4 x 106, ki = 5400 [30]) with methacrylate end groups. Note that the given 9. Plevna dar lalate see, soa oiam values of [P*] are ~2 orders of magnitude higher than na =a... those characteristic for the polymerization of “small” monomers under comparable conditions. In this regard, itcan be 10. Kazansky K.S., Kaminsky A.Ya., Ptitsyna N.V., Romanova assumed that during the transition to three-dimensional V.S., Topchieva |.N. // High molecular weight. conn. A. polymerization of macromonomers, i.e. to the 1987. T. 29. No. 10. P. 2219. conditions of network formation, the quadratic death of 11. Solovyanov A.A., Kazansky K.S. // High molecular weight. star-shaped macroradicals fixed in the form of its nodes conn. A. 1970. T. 12. No. 9. P. 2114. 

- 7 ocSEE ‘orepana i. "i pion aie ne ‘ analysis Of 49. Kazanskii K.S., Solovyanov A.A., Entelis S.G. // Eur. ORL ES CRGLER OL POI TEOF eae Polym. J. 1971. V. 7. No. 10. P. 1421. 

- polymacromonomers in solution and in a network will require detail. 13. Dubrovsky S.A., Kumpanenko I.V., Goldberg V.M., a number of aspects of the mechanism of their polymerization, on seme a pr High molecular weight. conn. A. 1975. T. 17. which the present work certainly does not pretend to be. sane . One of the .important preparative. consequences 14. Entelis S.G., Evreinov V.V., Gorshkov A.V. // Adv. Polym. Sci. 

- AnnetworkedanalysisPEOs: of would the alsomechanism involve, the selectionof formationand. useof of 15. 1986.Lapienis_V. 76. G.,P. Penczek129. §. // J. Bioactive and Compatible suitable chain transfer agents or systems that initiate “living” radical Polymers (in press). polymerization of methacrylate end groups. Both of these 16. Kazansky K.S., Skuridin S.G., Kuznetsova V.I., Evdokimov approaches Yu.M. // High molecular weight. conn. A. 1996. T. 38. can make it possible to more flexibly and accurately regulate No. 5. P. 875. ENA VALOEOtE ane aocordingly; the density 17. Kazansky K.S., Dubrovsky S.A., Antoshchenko N.V. // ity and properties of the resulting network. High molecular weight. conn. A. 1997. T. 39. No. 5. P. 816. The work was carried out in accordance with the Program 

- my scientific cooperation between the Russian and Polish = 18. Goldwasser J.M., Adolf H.G. /{ Polym. Eng. Sci. 1986. Academies of Sciences for 1996-1998. The Russian group of V. 26. No 21. P. 1510. authors thanks the Russian Foundation for Basic Research 19. Duda A., Florjanczyk Z., Hofman A., Slomkowski S., (project code 98-03-33325) for partial financial support Penczek S. // Macromolecules. 1990. V. 23. Ne 6. P. 1640. of the work. The authors express deep gratitude to Dr. S. Sosnovsky (Center for Molecular and Macromolecular Research of the PAS) for his assistance. 20. Chukanov N.V., Kumpanenko I.V., Kazansky K.S., Entelis S.G. // High molecular weight. conn. A. 1976. T. 18. No. 8. P. 1793. 

- power in recording and analyzing chromatograms with a light scattering detector. 21. Gorshkov AV., Much H., Becker H., Pasch H., Evreinov V.V., Entelis S.G. // J, Chromatogr. 1990. V. 523. 

- BIBLIOGRAPHY Not. P91. ; 22. Dubrovsky S.A., Rakova G.V., Lagutina M.A., 

- 1. Harris J.M. // J. Macromol. Sci., Rev. Macromol. Chem. Antoshchenko N.V., Vasilyev V.V., Kazansky K.S. // High Phys. 1985. V. 25. Ne 3. P. 325. molecular weight. conn. A. 1999. T. 41. No. 3. P. 527. 

HIGH MOLECULAR COMPOUNDS Series A Volume 42 No. 6 

2000 

## BhICOKOMOJIEKYJIAPHBIE COEXHHEHHA, Cepua A, 2000, mom 42, Ne 6, c. 915-926 SC OJIAMEPHS ANS 

YAK 541.64 :547.39 

## CTPOTO MOHO®YHKUMOHAJBHBIE METHJIOBBIE IDUPbI NOJMITHVIEHTDIAKOJA A METAKPHIIATHBIE MAKPOMOHOMEPHDI HA HX OCHOBE! © 2000 r. K. C. Kasancxui*, G. Lapienis**, B. H. Ky3nenosa*, JI. K. Taxomosa*, B. B. Espennos*, S. Penczek** 

*Hucmumym xumureckou musuxu um. H.H. Cemenoea Poccuticxoli axademuu HayK 117977 Mocxea, ya. Kocoteuna, 4 **Center of Molecular and Macromolecular Studies Polish Academy ofSciences, Sienkiewicza 112, 90-363 Ed6dz, Poland Tlocrynuna B pefakunto 28.10.1999 r. Tipunata 8 neyatp 12.01.2000 r. 

MerTojoM “xKHBOM” aHHOHHOM NOAMMEPH3allHH OKHCH 2ITHeHAa NOM ReEHMCTBHEM aNKOrONATA METHNOBOTO acupa TPH3THNeHIMHKONA NONyYeHbI MOHOMeTUIOBbIe 3c:pupb! LIST c M = 2000 u 5000, cpo6ogubie or npumeceit ITIST. Ux Monexynsapubie xapakTepucTHKH U YHCTOTA ONpeyeeHbI C MOMOLIbIO fa30c=pa3Hor OcMOMeTpHH, cheKTpockonuu MK, AMP 'H, a rakxKe XKHKOCTHOM xpoMaTorpacbH B KPUTHYECKHX YCOBHax. Ilo cofep>kaHHto MOHOMeTHIOBBIX 9cpupos IIST (96.8—-99.4% cormacHo ,aHHbIM AMP) cuHTesHpoBauHbile NOMMMepbI ONH3KM K MOMYYCHHbIM XPOMAaTOrpacpH4ecKOH OYHCTKOM HX KOMMEP¥eCKHX abaOroB (97.1-99.9%), nepBoHayanbHo cogepxKaBUIMX WO 25% IST. MetakpumupoBaHvem OfHOpOAHbIX MeTHIOBbIX 9¢pupoB TIOT cunTesupospaHbl MaKpOMOHOMepBsI C PyHKUMOHAMbHOCTHIO, He NpeBbiwatoujeh 1.0. B npepBapvTenbHbIx OMbITaxX MOKa3aHO, YTO HX MONUMEPH3al|HA MIPHBOAMT K pacTBOPHMBIM MOMMepaM, Tora KaK B Culy4ae MAKPOMOHOMEpoB, NOJY4eCHHbIX H3 KOMMepYueCKHX METHAOBBIX a¢:pupoB TIOT u cogepX*KaljuxX pa3sBeTBAAIOWM FMMeTaKpHNaT, OGpa3ylOTCA CWIHTbIe NMOMHMephI. JlaHa Npe_BapHTenbHaA XapaKTepHcTHKa pacTBOpuMbIX NpoxyKTos. Ax rugpoyquHaMuyeckHe MapaMeTpbl B BOMHOM cpeye cormacyIOTCA C KOMMAKTHOHM NpepANONORHTeMbHO 3Be39006pa3Ho CpopMoii MaKpOMOMeKyA, Ipw4eM YHCHO Myyelt [1A pasHbIx O6pa3oB cocTaBssaeT OT 25 Fo 120. STH OWeHKH NO NopsAAKy BeM4YMHbI OAH3KH K CheaHHbIM paHee Ha OcHoBe ynpyroro noBeyeHuaA ruyporenei IISO, B KOTOpBIX NOWOGHbIe 3Be3ROOOpasuble cpparMeHTbI HIpatoT pOslb y310B CeTKH. 

TlonuMepbl OKHCH 9TUEHAa, JOCTYMHbIe BO MHOpbe3HbIM HeOCTaTKOM, OfHAaKO, ABIACTCA JOBONbHO X*KecTBe MOAMuKaLMH C WIMpOKOH BapvalMei AMBbICOKOe comepxanne IIS, uTo mpu cunte3e Ha Hx HbI Wel, 4HCila HW MWpHpobI KOHUEBbIX TpyHM, WacTO OCHOBE flacT CyIeCcTBCHHO MeHee ONpejesICHHbie peHMCNOMb3yIOT B Ka4eCTBE MpOMEXYTOUHBIX BelllecTB 3YIbTATBI, oco6eHHO B ciyyae NONMyHKUMOHAIIbB MlOJHMepHOM CHHTe3e (1, 2). Oco6eHHO TIpHBsiekaHbIX PpCarenHTos. B 3HadHTebHO Mepe 3TO OTHOCHTTeNbHBI B 3TOM OTHOUWeHHH IIST, peakunu Koune© 4 K MakpoMonomepam IT3O, mockonbKy mpH Hx BbIX [py KOTOPbIX MO3BONAIOT NonydaTs MHoroTOAYYeHHu cbyHkuMonann3ayuelt TST o6pasyerca o6pa3Hble NPOHSBOPHEIe, B TOM YHcHe c GHomoru4eUPHMECb OucyHKUMOHANbHbIX OHTOMEepoB, YTO B CKM aKTHBHbIMH (pparMeHTamu [3, 4]. B cnyyae YCNOBHAX NOCTEAYIOWMeH NOMMMEPH3alHH TPUBORAT HeOOXOMMMOCTH CHHTe3a MOHOGyHKIMOHabHEIX an- — NOTHMEPHOH CeTKe. AYKTOB “alle BCero Ma TIDE (MITOT) c noerane MOHeoguopoguocts MITIS© no byxxynouanbHocTHu HOMCTHHOBbIC ScbupbI ( ) € HOcTaTOYHO orang B MOCHeAHHe Tol NpemMeTOM pala peTasbIMHPOKmM j{Mala3oHoM MM (or 350 go 5000). Mx ceunix uccneqosannii, B KOTOPbIX pa3HBIMH aHasuTHu! Pagota BbinomHeHa pa dHHaHcosol nopsZepxke PoccuiicKo4eCKHMH MCTOWaMH yCTaHOBICHO Haye B HX ro cbouma cbyHfaMenranbHbrx wccnepoRanna (Ko_ npoekTa 3HaduTeNbHOH (qo 30%) nonu ITST, sospacraromett 98-03-33325). c yBenuueHuemM MM [5-8]. [Ipwanupr stoi HeoqHo- 

915 

2* 

916 

## KA3AHCKMHA u ap. 

POJHOCTH BIOIHe ACHbI, TAK KaK B YCIIOBUAX CHHTeE3a Oxucb oTuneHa (O9, “Aldrich”) BaiyjepxHBaH MOHOS@HpoB METOJOM aHHOHHOH MomuMepH3ayHH Hay CaH, npH KOMHaTHOH TeMMepatype, THLaTeIbHO MpUcyTCTBytOllad B MHMUMaTOpe WI, CKopee, B MOlera3HpoBanu WH XpaHWIM B CTCKJIAHHOW aMitysiec, HOMEepe BOfla JOIDKHa TeHepHpOBaTh OM*PyHKWWOcHaGxeHHOM TecbIOHOBBIM KpaHoM Rotaflo®. Jo3uHaIbHbI€ MaKPOMOJICKYJIbI, IPH AesaKTHBaH Mpeposky OD B aMNyJbI WIA NONMMepu3allHu MpOu3BoBpaujaiommecsa BITSY. Tanupii Bonpoc ObuI Mpoyuyu no OObeEMY 43 XKHKOCTHBIX MEPHHKOB HIM 10 aHaJIH3HpOBaH HaMH paHee B CBA3H C CHHTC30M TST aBNeHH1O Ip BhIMOpaxXHBaHHH apoB OD w3 Kann3ayaHHol MM [9] uu MOHOtyHKUMOHaNBHbIX Mpo6poBaHHoro oGbema. B oGoux cny4asx KONM4YECTBO u3BOHEIX ITST [10]. MmMetotca monbirKu cosqaHHa §=©O9 onpeyenann B3BeLIMBaHHeM. KOMMep4eckHx MapoK MIT9OP, mumieHubix 3TOro He. qoctraTKa. Tak, B pa6ote [8] ynomuHaetca MIIOI XnopanHruppay MeTaKpHnoBol KUCHOTEI, Tpu(M-PEG 5000 low-diol, Union Carbide Chem. Co.), 27#14M¥H u 6eH30N1, HCNONb3yeMble IPH MeTakpHcomepKallqMii, COrmacHo JaHHBIM pa3HbIx MeTonos, #poBanuu MITSI’, oumuyjann, Kak omucaHo B paboof 0.6 0 2.1% TSP. Tax (16, 17]. B To xe BpeMa XOPOLIO H3BeCTHO, 4TO “OKHBaA” Cunme3 MOH3P MOH3P aHMOHHad TOMMMepH3allvaA OKHCH 9TUeHa (OD) . MO3BONACT NMOMYYaTh MOMEKYIAPHO OHOPOAHBIE Tlonumepu3auuio OD mHAuuMpoBanu crapToBol TI90 c BbIcoKoit u 3aqaHHol MM MM [11-13]. Tepmun cMeCcbIO, cofepxKamleh MTL u ero ankoronaT (OKO- cofepxKamleh MTL u ero ankoronaT (OKO- MTL u ero ankoronaT (OKO- u ero ankoronaT (OKO- ero ankoronaT (OKO- ankoronaT (OKO- (OKO“ONHOpOpHbIA” IpHMeHAeTCA B aHHOM cnyyae ToMb- IpHMeHAeTCA B aHHOM cnyyae ToMb- B aHHOM cnyyae ToMb- aHHOM cnyyae ToMb- cnyyae ToMb- ToMb10 20%), KoTOpy!O roTOBUNM AByM# cIlocobaMu. KO B TOM CMBICHe, 4TO MOMMMep MMeeT XapakTepHoe B TOM CMBICHe, 4TO MOMMMep MMeeT XapakTepHoe TOM CMBICHe, 4TO MOMMMep MMeeT XapakTepHoe CMBICHe, 4TO MOMMMep MMeeT XapakTepHoe 4TO MOMMMep MMeeT XapakTepHoe MOMMMep MMeeT XapakTepHoe MMeeT XapakTepHoe XapakTepHoe B epsom u3 Hux (MeTo I) B osApoBaHHOM KoNMue- epsom u3 Hux (MeTo I) B osApoBaHHOM KoNMue- u3 Hux (MeTo I) B osApoBaHHOM KoNMue- Hux (MeTo I) B osApoBaHHOM KoNMue- (MeTo I) B osApoBaHHOM KoNMue- I) B osApoBaHHOM KoNMue- B osApoBaHHOM KoNMue- osApoBaHHOM KoNMue- KoNMuequia Hero y3Koe MMP u ue cofepxKuT MaKpoMonekyn Hero y3Koe MMP u ue cofepxKuT MaKpoMonekyn MMP u ue cofepxKuT MaKpoMonekyn u ue cofepxKuT MaKpoMonekyn cofepxKuT MaKpoMonekyn MaKpoMonekyn CTBE MTO3TI pactBopamu HaBecky MeTasIMYeCcKOrO MHOrO TuNa CbyHKUMOHANBHOCTH, CbyHKUMOHANBHOCTH, HexesH nanupye- nanupyeKaa, MOCNe 4ero CMECh BaKYYMMpOBaIM AO IIpeMblit. AMeetca MHOxeCTBO MpHMepoB Takoro pona KPallleHusa rasoBbifenenus. B metoge B metoge metoge II ga cuHte3a ga cuHte3a cuHte3a CHHTe30B. alKOrONATa HCHONb30BanIH KOH, KoToppiit pacTBopanu B MTSI, HempepbiBHo NepeMelIMBad CMecb [Ipyram nogxogoM, no3BonsouM pocTH4, To To UpH 80°C no no npexpatienus BbIjeneHHA apoB BOApI 2Ke LeNM, ABJIAETCA OUNCTKAa KOMMepyeckHX MII3T MII3T 8B BakyyMe. OkoHuaTesIbHy!0 OcyIIKy 9TOH cMeCH MeTOaMH XpoMaTorpacbHM B yCROBHAX, Korga pa3MPOWSBOAMM NyTeM AByKpaTHOM a3cOTpONHO OTJleneHHe MpovcxoAUT MpeHMytjectBeHHO HH ucTOHKH C GeH30sI0M GeH30sI0M H OKOHYAaTEABHBIM TIyGOKUM BaKJIKOUNTEIIBHO 10 CbyHKUMOHANbHOCTH, a He WO MM. MM. KYYMHpoBaHieM. 

B To xe BpeMa XOPOLIO H3BeCTHO, 4TO “OKHBaA” Cunme3 MOH3P MOH3P aHMOHHad TOMMMepH3allvaA OKHCH 9TUeHa (OD) . MO3BONACT NMOMYYaTh MOMEKYIAPHO OHOPOAHBIE Tlonumepu3auuio OD mHAuuMpoBanu crapToBol TI90 c BbIcoKoit u 3aqaHHol MM MM [11-13]. Tepmun cMeCcbIO, cofepxKamleh MTL u ero ankoronaT (OKO- cofepxKamleh MTL u ero ankoronaT (OKO- MTL u ero ankoronaT (OKO- u ero ankoronaT (OKO- ero ankoronaT (OKO- ankoronaT (OKO- (OKO“ONHOpOpHbIA” IpHMeHAeTCA B aHHOM cnyyae ToMb- IpHMeHAeTCA B aHHOM cnyyae ToMb- B aHHOM cnyyae ToMb- aHHOM cnyyae ToMb- cnyyae ToMb- ToMb10 20%), KoTOpy!O roTOBUNM AByM# cIlocobaMu. KO B TOM CMBICHe, 4TO MOMMMep MMeeT XapakTepHoe B TOM CMBICHe, 4TO MOMMMep MMeeT XapakTepHoe TOM CMBICHe, 4TO MOMMMep MMeeT XapakTepHoe CMBICHe, 4TO MOMMMep MMeeT XapakTepHoe 4TO MOMMMep MMeeT XapakTepHoe MOMMMep MMeeT XapakTepHoe MMeeT XapakTepHoe XapakTepHoe B epsom u3 Hux (MeTo I) B osApoBaHHOM KoNMue- epsom u3 Hux (MeTo I) B osApoBaHHOM KoNMue- u3 Hux (MeTo I) B osApoBaHHOM KoNMue- Hux (MeTo I) B osApoBaHHOM KoNMue- (MeTo I) B osApoBaHHOM KoNMue- I) B osApoBaHHOM KoNMue- B osApoBaHHOM KoNMue- osApoBaHHOM KoNMue- KoNMuequia Hero y3Koe MMP u ue cofepxKuT MaKpoMonekyn Hero y3Koe MMP u ue cofepxKuT MaKpoMonekyn MMP u ue cofepxKuT MaKpoMonekyn u ue cofepxKuT MaKpoMonekyn cofepxKuT MaKpoMonekyn MaKpoMonekyn CTBE MTO3TI pactBopamu HaBecky MeTasIMYeCcKOrO MHOrO TuNa CbyHKUMOHANBHOCTH, CbyHKUMOHANBHOCTH, HexesH nanupye- nanupyeKaa, MOCNe 4ero CMECh BaKYYMMpOBaIM AO IIpeMblit. AMeetca MHOxeCTBO MpHMepoB Takoro pona KPallleHusa rasoBbifenenus. B metoge B metoge metoge II ga cuHte3a ga cuHte3a cuHte3a CHHTe30B. alKOrONATa HCHONb30BanIH KOH, KoToppiit pacTBopanu B MTSI, HempepbiBHo NepeMelIMBad CMecb [Ipyram nogxogoM, no3BonsouM pocTH4, To To UpH 80°C no no npexpatienus BbIjeneHHA apoB BOApI 2Ke LeNM, ABJIAETCA OUNCTKAa KOMMepyeckHX MII3T MII3T 8B BakyyMe. OkoHuaTesIbHy!0 OcyIIKy 9TOH cMeCH MeTOaMH XpoMaTorpacbHM B yCROBHAX, Korga pa3MPOWSBOAMM NyTeM AByKpaTHOM a3cOTpONHO OTJleneHHe MpovcxoAUT MpeHMytjectBeHHO HH ucTOHKH C GeH30sI0M GeH30sI0M H OKOHYAaTEABHBIM TIyGOKUM BaKJIKOUNTEIIBHO 10 CbyHKUMOHANbHOCTH, a He WO MM. MM. KYYMHpoBaHieM. Ipunuunbl Takoro pazyeneHha CCopMysMpOBaHbI B B cTeKNAHHbIe aMMyJIbI EMKOCTbIO OKONO 20 MIC paGote [14]. NOPTOTOBNeCHHOH CTapTOBOH CMeCbIO JO3HpoBaIn Hactosiyaa OS, aMNyJibl OTNAHBaIIN VM BbIeEpXUBANM B XKUIKOcTaTba COMepKUT Pe3yNbTAaTbI UCcryom TepmocTaTe pH 70°C MH BCTPaAXHBaHMH B TeCNeAOBaHHA, MpeMPHHATOTO C LeMbIO BbIACHCHHA yeyye 2.5—5 y. peasIbHbIX BO3MOXHOCTeH AaHHOHHOM TMowuMepH3ayuu OD npx nonyyeHuu ofnopoguEix MITST kak Tlocne 3aBepilienua nomMMepu3anMy, KoTopaa BO MIpOMexKYTOYHBIX MpOsyKTOB Jia Mocnepyrouero BCeX ciyyasx Obina KONHYeCTBEHHOM, aMMy.1bI cCHHTe3a, HaNpAMep, CTporo MOHOYyHKUMOHAaMbHEIx BCKPHIBANM, OOpaz0BaBIMiica NONMMep pacTBOpsH MaKpOMOHOMepob. JIpyraa YacTb ITO paGoTbI, mo8 BORE. TlonyteHHbii pacTsop ounilanu, Noypepras cBALeHHad xpomaTorpacpHyeckoit ounctKe MITISE-YbTpacbuneTpauyau (Amicon Stirred Cell c MemOpaoT npuMecedt ITST, ny6nukyetca napannenbuo [15]. HOW Ha M = 1000) a mponyckas 3aTeM Yepe3 KaTHOHo6MeHHYy!O CMOJY B KHCHOTHOK chopMme, mocie 4ero NONHMep BbI,eIAIM CyOMMMAaL|MOHHOH CyIIKOH. 

## SKCMEPAMEHTAJIBHAA UACTb 

Ucxoduoie sewecmea Cunme3 u noaumepuzayuunA MAKPOMOHOMEPOG MakpomonHomepp!i IT90O, cogepxalMe Ha KOHIAaX MoHoMeTHIOBLIG = oCPHP = TPHOTUJICHTIMKONA = eNH COOTBETCTBCHHO MECTHJIbHy!O H MeTakpwaT(MTOD, “Aldrich”) rpwxqbi meperonanu Hay Na B Hyt0 rpynisl, Momy4anu 10 ananorunu c paGoron [16] BakyyMe (OKosI0 90°C/4 MM pT. cT.). CormacHo qaHfpamMol peakyweit OH-rpynn MIISI c xnopanrugHbIM XKHAKOCTHOM xpomaTorpadun (“Hewlett PackpvOM MeTaKPHOBOM KHCIOTHI B GeH30se B NpucyTard 5890”, remnepaTypHas TporpamMa: 10 rpaf/MHH cCTBHM TpHOTHIaMHHa. C ebio NOBbILIeHHA CTeneB HHTepBane 50—220°C), on cofepxan He Gonee 1% HM CbyHKI[MOHAIH3alMH MONLHbIC OTHOWICHHA XNOpnpumece. MTSI yo3uposaav B peaKUMOHHbIe aMaHrHppHyja 4M TpHoTHNaMMHa K OH-rpynnam Oni IlybI B aTMOCqpepe cyxoro Ar. yBewM4eHbI 70 2.5—-4.0. Monvuoty peakuuu 4 :yHKBbICOKOMOJIEKYJIAPHbIE COEMMHEHUA Cepus A tom42 N6 2000 

CTPOFO MOHO®YHKLIIMOHAIJIBHBIE METVJIOBBIE S®MPHI 

917 

UMOHaIbHOCTh MaKpOMOHOMepoB TIO MeTaKpHJaTHbIM PpylilaM KOHTpOJHpoBaH MeTOHOM Y®-cnekTpocboToMeTpHuH Mocne AByKpaTHOTO ocaxkyeHHa llomuMepa u3 G6eH30Na relTaHoM. 

UMOHaIbHOCTh MaKpOMOHOMepoB TIO MeTaKpHJaT@yHKUMOHAIbHOCTh MAKPOMOHOMEPOB IO MeTaHbIM PpylilaM KOHTpOJHpoBaH MeTOHOM Y®-cnekKpHNaTHbIM rpyiiam onpeyenanu 43 YO-cneKkTpos TpocboToMeTpHuH Mocne AByKpaTHOTO ocaxkyeHHa 0 MeToquKe [16]. Kpome Toro, B paye cnyyaes MM llomuMepa u3 G6eH30Na relTaHoM. nonmyuaempix MIISC u MakpOMOHOMEpoB KOHTpOJIMPOBasIM BHCKO3HMETPHUeCCKMM METOOM, KaK 3TO PayukasIbHy!0 MONMMepH3allHiO MaKPOMOHOMEONvcaHo B TOM xe paboTe. POBMBI kK5.‘OLNaS OUL420 HOR ACHCTBHEM CHCTEMacc-cieKTpbI NouMepoB B BapHaHte MALDIS292 se 25203 (1. an MMOJIb/. KAKAOO KOM- TORS PerucTpupoBanH Cc MOMOLIbIo mpH6opa rotors (0 108 smonein 60°C) Kouucrt pana “Voyager Elite™” c ucnomb30BaHHeM B KauecTBe MaTTlOAMMepa “— ’ , PHUbL DHrHApOKcHOeH30MHOM KHCHOTHI c foOG6aBKoli TONMMEPH3alMH B ONbITax CocTaBiAsa 5—20 Mac. %. Tocne Nal; avis KanHGpoBKu NpuMeHsuTH HACynHH (M= 5735). BOWOU, NO_BepramuPcaKMOHHY!OWuanu3y MpOTHBCMCCbBOMbIpa3s0aBianu(MeLIKM OOpa3ubI rOTOBHH 10 cTaHapTHOH MeTopuKe. Sigma D 7884), a 3aTeM Cy6JIMMal|HOHHO BbICyLIMBa[1a ONCHKH MONeKYAPHbIX XapaKTeEPUCTHK Mpoau. B paye caydaeB NONyYYeHHbIA NpOAyKT BHOBB AYKTOB MONHMepH3al{MW MAaKPOMOHOMCPOB MCTOOM pacTBOpanu B GeH30Ne, cbuNIbTpoBannH, ocaxyanu u3TILX ucnomb3opanu xpomaTorpaduyeckyto cuctemy ObITKOM reliTaHa H BbICYILMBasIM B BAKYyMe. LKB c BOO B KayecTBe 3JIKOCHTAa, KOJIOHKAMH PSS Suprema-Gel (30, 100 u 1000 A, 8 x 300 mm Kaxxnaa) MH feTekTopamu Refractomonitor [IV LDC u Wyatt Memoow xapaxmepucmuxu noaumepoe Dawn DSP laser photometer. [Ina ananmu3a xpomMaTorpamM, NlosIy4eHHbIX C JeTEKTOPOM CBeTOpaccesHHA, CpeaHeuncnenupie MM onpefensanmv c MOMOUbIO §=—-HCHOIb30BaIM MporpaMMy ASTRA 4.70.07. Kanu6ra3o0cba3Horo OcMoMeTpa “Knauer” (Mofemb 1993 r.) POBKy KONOHOK NPOBOAMIH No HaOopy CTaHapTHBIx B CH,Cl, np 26°C no cranyapTHol npouerype. II39O B untepsane M = 6 x 10*-9.6 x 10°; Kanu6posKy OMMCbIBaJIN MOJMHOMOM TpeTbelt cTeneHH. 

Cnextppt AMP 'H perucrpuposanu Ha cieKTpoCDCI, B KayecrBe pacrsoputTena. C enbio KoNMYeCTBeHHOrO onpeyeneHua comepxaHua OH-rpynn ucOmb30BaNH TpudTopyKcycHbiii aHruapuy (TA), BBO[MMBIi HENOCPeACTBEHHO B aMTTYsy BIATHKpaTdom u3ObITKe No OTHOLeHHIO K OH-rpymmam. Stor Mero Obi paHee anpoGvposaH Ha aHanu3e KOHUeBLIX OHrpynn IT9SI [18] # nomm-€-kanponaxtoxa [19]. 

OcHopHaa mpoOnema B CHHTe3€ CTporo MOHOPyHKUMOHAIbHBIX npowsBoqHEix ITSO nytem anuOHHOM NonmMepu3aulMn ODS — Wckmro"eHHe s1106bIXx ~4HCKOHTPONMpyeMbIX COMHUNMATOpOB, B YacTHOCTH OncbyHKUMOHAJIbHbIX, KOTOpble reHepHpylOT MaKpoMOJIEKYJbI, PACTYLME C ABYX KOHHOB, ITO Tp HX N0clepyrolleH e3akKTUBalHu MpHBOAUT K OO6pa30Ba#410 mpumecu ITSP. OcHOBHbIM HCTOUHHKOM 3THX OCTOXHEHHH, eCTECTBEHHO, ABIACTCA BORA, MPUCyTCTBY!OUaad B MOHOMepe WIM B HHMUMMpytouleH Mo4OPYHKUMOHANBHOH CMecH. 

WK-cnexrppr cuumanm wa WK-cpyppe-cnexrpoMetpe “Bio-Rad FTS-7” B TT® B Kayecrse pacrsoputena. CofepxKanve OH-rpyn onpenenanu cornacno pa6ore [20], ucnomp3ya KoaddpwymenT nornomenua 147 n/monb cm mpu 3490 cm, onpefeweHHEI KamuOpoBKoli Mo 9TaNOHHEIM [I9T. 

AHanH3 STOrO BOMpOca MOKa3bIBaeT, ITO Tpe6oBaHHa K COy\epxKaHHto BularH B peaKUHOHHOH CMecH cTaHOBATCA Bce Gomee CTPOrHMH MO Mepe yBenHUeHusa miaHupyemoli MM nonumepa. Hanpumep, 8 cHHTe3e MOHOYHKUMOHATBHBIX MPOH3BOFHbIX ITS ITS M = 2000 u 5000, = 2000 u 5000, 2000 u 5000, u 5000, 5000, koTopble Oblau WembIo HacTosel WembIo HacTosel HacTosel paG6oTbi, mpuMecb 1% TIST orseyaeT cofepxaHHIo oKono 0.01-0.004 mac. % H,O (0.005-0.002 mMomb/m) co- 0.01-0.004 mac. % H,O (0.005-0.002 mMomb/m) co- mac. % H,O (0.005-0.002 mMomb/m) co- % H,O (0.005-0.002 mMomb/m) co- H,O (0.005-0.002 mMomb/m) co- (0.005-0.002 mMomb/m) co- mMomb/m) co- coorBeTcTBeHHO, YTO JerKO JOCTIOKUMO IIpH OcyHIKe MO- JerKO JOCTIOKUMO IIpH OcyHIKe MO- JOCTIOKUMO IIpH OcyHIKe MO- IIpH OcyHIKe MO- OcyHIKe MO- MOHoMepa Hag CaH, u MclONb30BaHHM BaKYyMHOM TexHH- Hag CaH, u MclONb30BaHHM BaKYyMHOM TexHH- CaH, u MclONb30BaHHM BaKYyMHOM TexHH- u MclONb30BaHHM BaKYyMHOM TexHH- MclONb30BaHHM BaKYyMHOM TexHH- BaKYyMHOM TexHH- TexHHKH. BerGop cnoco6a No_rOTOBKH HCXOqHOH, TaK TaK Ha3biBaemoli crapTosoii cMecu, TakxKe ONpepemaAeTcA 9TUMH cMecu, TakxKe ONpepemaAeTcA 9TUMH 9TUMH KpHTepHamMu. HavOonee npelM3HOHHON aBAeTCA Ips- HavOonee npelM3HOHHON aBAeTCA Ips- npelM3HOHHON aBAeTCA Ips- aBAeTCA Ips- IpsMad peakiia HeOOXOAMMOH HeOOXOAMMOH NOpiHH MeTasia MeTasia co chMpTOM, XOTA pacTBopeHve KOH c OTTOHKOli BOI B BaKy- XOTA pacTBopeHve KOH c OTTOHKOli BOI B BaKy- pacTBopeHve KOH c OTTOHKOli BOI B BaKy- KOH c OTTOHKOli BOI B BaKy- c OTTOHKOli BOI B BaKy- OTTOHKOli BOI B BaKy- BOI B BaKy- B BaKy- BaKyyMe WIM C OeCH30NbHBIM a3COTPONOM OKa3bIBaHOTCA BIONHe MpHeMJIEMbIMH JIA He CNIMIMKOM BbICOKHX 

Ananu3 MIIST no MeTofy 2xXHKOCTHOH XpoMaHusa miaHupyemoli MM nonumepa. Hanpumep, 8 Torpadun B KpHTH4eCKUX YCNOBMAX NpOBOAMNM NO cHHTe3e MOHOYHKUMOHATBHBIX MPOH3BOFHbIX ITS ITS aHaloruu c paGoton [21] c nomomsbro xpomaTorpa-_—c M = 2000 u 5000, = 2000 u 5000, 2000 u 5000, u 5000, 5000, koTopble Oblau WembIo HacTosel WembIo HacTosel HacTosel cba “Waters-590” c pecbpakTOMeTpH4eCKHM JleTeKTOpaG6oTbi, mpuMecb 1% TIST orseyaeT cofepxaHHIo pom “Waters-410” a KononKol Lichrosorb-10 RP-18. oKono 0.01-0.004 mac. % H,O (0.005-0.002 mMomb/m) co- 0.01-0.004 mac. % H,O (0.005-0.002 mMomb/m) co- mac. % H,O (0.005-0.002 mMomb/m) co- % H,O (0.005-0.002 mMomb/m) co- H,O (0.005-0.002 mMomb/m) co- (0.005-0.002 mMomb/m) co- mMomb/m) co- coB kayecTBe 9J1K0CHTAa HCHOIb30BanIN CMecb CH;CN— — orBeTcTBeHHO, YTO JerKO JOCTIOKUMO IIpH OcyHIKe MO- JerKO JOCTIOKUMO IIpH OcyHIKe MO- JOCTIOKUMO IIpH OcyHIKe MO- IIpH OcyHIKe MO- OcyHIKe MO- MOH,O (60 : 40 mo oObemy) co cKopocTbio NofayH HoMepa Hag CaH, u MclONb30BaHHM BaKYyMHOM TexHH- Hag CaH, u MclONb30BaHHM BaKYyMHOM TexHH- CaH, u MclONb30BaHHM BaKYyMHOM TexHH- u MclONb30BaHHM BaKYyMHOM TexHH- MclONb30BaHHM BaKYyMHOM TexHH- BaKYyMHOM TexHH- TexHH1 Mn/muH. O6pa3iibI O6bemom 10 MK MMeJIM KOHCHKH. BerGop cnoco6a No_rOTOBKH HCXOqHOH, TaK TaK Ha3biTpalro 5 Mr/mi. OObembl ynepxanua IST u MIIOr ~~ Baemoli crapTosoii cMecu, TakxKe ONpepemaAeTcA 9TUMH cMecu, TakxKe ONpepemaAeTcA 9TUMH 9TUMH B 9THX YCHOBHMAX COCTaBIIAJIM 2.98 4 3.25 MII COOTBeETCTKpHTepHamMu. HavOonee npelM3HOHHON aBAeTCA Ips- HavOonee npelM3HOHHON aBAeTCA Ips- npelM3HOHHON aBAeTCA Ips- aBAeTCA Ips- IpsBeHHO. HecKObKO MOQM@MUMpOBaHHbIM BapHaHT Mad peakiia HeOOXOAMMOH HeOOXOAMMOH NOpiHH MeTasia MeTasia co chMp9TOFO Ke MeTOMa HCHONb3OBaIIM AIA XapaKTEpHCTHTOM, XOTA pacTBopeHve KOH c OTTOHKOli BOI B BaKy- XOTA pacTBopeHve KOH c OTTOHKOli BOI B BaKy- pacTBopeHve KOH c OTTOHKOli BOI B BaKy- KOH c OTTOHKOli BOI B BaKy- c OTTOHKOli BOI B BaKy- OTTOHKOli BOI B BaKy- BOI B BaKy- B BaKy- BaKyKH KOMMEP¥ECKHX HM OUMINCHHBIX XpoMaTorpadyuyeyMe WIM C OeCH30NbHBIM a3COTPONOM OKa3bIBaHOTCA cxu MITOIF [15]. BIONHe MpHeMJIEMbIMH JIA He CNIMIMKOM BbICOKHX 

BbICOKOMOJIEKYJIAPHbIE COEMHMHEHUA Cepua A tom42 N6 2000 

KA3SAHCKUHu gp. 

918 

TaGnuua 1. MonekynapHble xapakTepHCTHKH MOHOMETHNOBBIX acpupos 13ST 

|||||||||KEK||||“wee|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|O6pasen|a|09: MTS<br>:<br>MOJIb/MOJIb|’|BbI4HC-|razocba3Haa<br>jeHo**|oOcMOMeTpUA||SMP||MK-cnext-<br>pockonHsa|OH: CH<br>:<br>(AMP)|3|SIMP|2KH]\KOCTHAaA<br>XpoMaTorpa@ua|
|A||Fluka||2000|2445|2500|-|-|1.53||79.0|81.2|
|B||Fluka||2000|1825|2038|-|-|1.01||99.5|-|
|B||43.1||2060|2570|2125|0.97|0.96|1.01||99.4|95.5|
|r||44.8||2135|2360|2280|0.94|1.01|1.01||99.3|97.0|
|a||41.0||1970|2420|2045|0.96|0.96|1.05||98.5|97.4|
|E||Sigma||5000|5105|5210|-|-|1.60||73.5|75.1|
|K||Sigma||5000|4329|5193|-|-|1.00|||~100|-|
|3||109.4||4980|5280|$135|0.97|0.87|1.06||97.2|98.3|
|u||108.9||4965|4845|4875|1.02|1.11|1.10||96.8|97.9|
|K||114.7||5210|5300|$115|1.02|-|1.04||98.2|95.7|



* Kommepueckue o6pa3ubi A, B, E, XK, B TOM 4HCHe OUHLeHHbIe XpOMaTOrpatpH4eckHM MeTO]OM (B, XK); cHHTesupoBaHuble 06pasupl: MeTog I (JI, K), metog II (B, I, 3, MH). aa o6pa3yos A, B, E, K B cnenyroujeit KoNOHKe yka3aHa PupMa-NpOH3BOANTeNb. ** BEruncieno 43 cooTHomenua O3/MTOTI: M,, = 44.05 (O3/MT3II + 3); ana o6pasyos A, B, E, K npwBefena HOMMHanbHaa MM. *** CpeqHeducleHHad PYHKUMOHAIBHOCTS 10 rpynmam OH B pacuete Ha MM, H3MepeHHy!O OCMOMETPHUeCCKH. 

MM. Paunee Ha npHMepe HUTpOcbeHHIBHBIX NPOH3BOZHbIX IT9O 6bi0 MOKa3aHO, ITO Takad TeXHMKa HayjexKHO oGeche4uHBaeT MOHOCYHKUMOHAIbHOCTL MposyKToB c MM suaots fo 10° [10]. AmMento sta anpoGupoBaHHad MeTOJONOrHA VMCNONb30BaHa B HacTOAeli pasote. 

## @ynxyuonanbno odnopodnore MITIT 

MosekynapHbie xapaktepuctuku cepuud MITSI’, NOJYYEHHBIX METO][OM “XKHBOW” aHHOHHOM MOHMepusayun OD, gaHbl B Ta6n. 1. B wenax conoctaBsieHHA B HCH MpHBeJeHbI TakxKe aHHble [IA HEKOTOPbIx KoMMepyeckux MITSI B ucxofHOM cocTosHHN, a TakxKe Nocile HX XpoMaTorpacbuyecKOl OUKCTKH. 

IIpexye pcero cneqyeT oOpaTHTb BHHMaHHe Ha BeIM4HHbI MM nposykTos, KOTOpbie OObIYHO yKa3bIBalOT Ha YPOBEHb KOHTPOJIA B CHHTe3€ 110 MeTOAy “SKHBOM” NomMMepH3alnv, re MM 3afaHa coOoTHOIe@HHeM MOHOMepa HM MHMIMaTopa. ConocraBieHve pacueTHbIX HM H3MepseMbIx BeM4HH MM, nmpupepenHbIX B TaOH. 1, WOKa3bIBACT HX IPHMEPHOe COOTBETCTBHe, XOTA H3MepsemMBIe MM, Kak npaBato, Jaxe HeCKOJIBKO Bbille. OTYACTH 3TO MOXET GBITb OGycJIOBNeHO TOTepaAMH HHMIUMUpyrollero MOHOSdupa 

Mp OKOHYATeJIbHOM BaKYYMHPOBaHHH CHCTeMBI nepey BBeyeHHeM OD, a TakxKe yyaseHHeM HH3KOMONeKyJApHOM cbpaKUMH Npo_yKTa NpH yAbTpacwiLTpayun. OTMeTHM, YTO OObIMHO B MOJOOHBIX CHHTe3ax 9KcHepHMeHTabHble MM Hwxe pacyeTHbIX H3-3a HeH36eXKHOTO BAIMAHUA CHYYaMHbIX COMHUIMAaTOPOB. 

BecbMa HHPOpMaTHBHbIMH OKa3bIBalOTCA B jaHHOM Cyly4ae chekTpbi AMP. B cpeTe 3THX JaHHbIX PacCMOTpHM KPHTepHH COOTBETCTBHA MOyYaeMbIx npogyxtos cdbopmyne MITST CH;,0CH,CH,O(CH,CH,O), _»CH,CH,OH, a b . c ° die (1) B KOTOpOH GyKBaMu OO03Ha4eHbI CTpyKTypHbie IpyNMbI IpOTOHOB. Mncopmauua 0 AIMHe Wen MOXeT ObITb Nosy4eHa pAMo u3 AMP-cnextpa. [eicTBuTenbHo, H3MepeHHe HHTerpasIbHbIX MHTCHCHBHOCTeH CHrHasOB, OTHOCALIMXCA K NPOTOHAM Lew HW KOHICBbIX rpyiil CH; 4 CH,OH (8 chopmyste sTo MpoTOHBI c, a He COOTBETCTBEHHO), BaeT TaKylO BO3MO>KHOCTb. CiIeKTpbl SMP napuBupyanbHoro MTOT, uchomb3yemoro B Ka4eCTBe MOJEJIM, H OMHOFO 43 CHHTe3HPOBaHHbIx MITSE MpuBeseHb! Ha puc. |. 

BbICOKOMOJIEKYJIAPHBIE COEMMHEHHA Cepun A Tom42 N6 2000 

CTPOTO MOHO®YHKIJMOHAJIBHBIE METHJIOBbIE SOHPHI 

919 

**==> picture [352 x 432] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
(a) c<br>a<br>b<br>d<br>e<br>ee ee i ee a<br>4.6 4.3 4.0 3.7 3.4<br>(6) .<br>a<br>b<br>d<br>e<br>ee ee ee ee oa<br>44 4.1 3.8 3.5 3.2<br>5, M. a.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Puc. 1, AMP 'H-cnexrppt MTOF (a) a MISTI (6, o6pasey I 8 ta6a. 1) B CDCI, c qo6asxou TPA u 3sanepxkoii Me@xk]y HMIyIBcaMH 10 c, BykBaMH 1OKa3aHO OTHECEHHe CHTHAIOB K CTpyKTYPHbIM pyiiaM MpOTOHOB B cpopMyje (1). 3ftecb H Ha pic. 2-4 aMIIMTYAbI CHTHAOB 10 OCH OpAHHaT AaHbI B MIPOM3BONbHbIX EQUHHWAaX. 

Hekotopad CHOKHOCTh COCTOHT B TOM, 4TO OOBIYHO CHIHasIbI NPOTOHOB OWKaliwieH K THA{pOKcuny CH,-rpynnsi (e, 5 ~ 3.6 M. 9.) Haxogatca B6mu3H HHTCHCHBHBIX CHPHasIOB Wenu (c, 6 = 3.64 M. .), 4TO He NO3BONACT MPOBECTH HX KOPpeKTHOE HHTerPupoBaHue. ITa 3aqata pelllaeTcA C MOMOMIbIO pa3JIMUHBIX “CHBHTOBbIX” peareHTOB, KOTOPble H3MCHA1OT COCTOAHHE NpeAKOHeBOH rpyntibi, oOOpasya CTHAPOKCHJIOM CHJIbHYIO BOAOpOmHyIO cBa3b (TIMCO [5]}) HM XMMHYeCKOe CoeqHHeHHe (TPHXNOpaHeTHauzounanat [6], TPA TPA [18, 19]). AMeHHO c HcNONL30- AMeHHO c HcNONL30- c HcNONL30- HcNONL30BaHHeM NocieqHero M3 HHX 3alMMCaHbi CIEKTpbI puc. NocieqHero M3 HHX 3alMMCaHbi CIEKTpbI puc. M3 HHX 3alMMCaHbi CIEKTpbI puc. HHX 3alMMCaHbi CIEKTpbI puc. 3alMMCaHbi CIEKTpbI puc. CIEKTpbI puc. puc. 1, 

Ha KOTOPbIX 1OKa3aHO OTHeCeHHe NUKOB K IIpOTOHaM pa3HUHbIX rpynn. Kak BHAHO, CHPHaJbl Ppynnyl CH,OC(O)CF, (6 = 4.45—4.50 M. J.) 3HauHTeNBHO cMeLWIeHbI OT CHTHaNOB Uenu, 4YTO NOsBOAAeT ONpeeNHTb COOTHOMIeHHe STHX Tpynl, KOTOpoe O6paTHO AHHe Wen nomHMepa. B cny4ae MeTHIIbHbIX NpoToHOB (a, 6 = 3.37 M. q.) 9Ta Ke 3aaya pemlaeTca o7eMeHTapHo. 

HM XMMHYeCKOe CoeqHHeHHe (TPHXNOpaHeTHBennunns! MM, paccuntaHHble 43 OTHOWIeHHA [6], TPA TPA [18, 19]). AMeHHO c HcNONL30- AMeHHO c HcNONL30- c HcNONL30- HcNONL30WHTCHCHBHOCTeHi CHTHaJIOB 3BCHbEB Wenn HW NOsyCyMBaHHeM NocieqHero M3 HHX 3alMMCaHbi CIEKTpbI puc. NocieqHero M3 HHX 3alMMCaHbi CIEKTpbI puc. M3 HHX 3alMMCaHbi CIEKTpbI puc. HHX 3alMMCaHbi CIEKTpbI puc. 3alMMCaHbi CIEKTpbI puc. CIEKTpbI puc. puc. 1, MbI KOHW€BbIX Ppyill, MpeyAcTaBNeH! B TaGq. 1. Kak BbICOKOMOJIEK YJIAPHBIE COEMHHEHHA Cepua A tTom42 M6 2000 

920 KA3AHCKUHAu 

## op. 

BUHO, OHH HaXxOfaTca axe B Oonee yhopneTBopuAMP (tTa6n. 1), uTo MHL NOmYepKHBaeT 9KBUBATEJIbBHOM COOTBETCTBHH C pacueTOM, YCM H3MePpeHJICHTHOCTh OGOHX NOJXOMOB. Hbie razocpa3Hout OCMOMeTpHel. Taku 06pa30M, aHHoHHad NOMMMepH3alHaA OD B BTOpbIM BaxKHbIM CTPYKTYPHbIM KPHTe€pHeM ABYCJIOBHAX, HCKJIFOUAIOUIHX yYacTHe BObI Kak OuaiseTca cbyHKMOHambHOcTA MIIST no o6euM KoH(PYHKUMOHAaIbHOTO COMHHWMaTOpa, MpvBOAHT kK I€BbIM [pyllaM. OuweBHHO, UTO OHA MOXeT GBITh TpaKTHYeCKH HHIMBHAyaNbHbIM MIIST. Takux xe Nlowy4eHa H3 OTHOMCHHA TeX %Ke CHTHAaIOB, HanpuJIM flaxe Oomee BBICOKMX Pe3yIbTAaTOB MOXHO J0Mep, cH a unucue. B ta6n. | npHBefeHbI HaigeHOHTbCA, MCHONb3yA NpenapaTHBHy!O XpoMaTorpaHbIe 43 AMP-cnekTpoB (hyHKIMOHaNbHOCTH moO HO M0 MpefoxKeHHOMy HegaBHO MeTomy [15]. Kak OH-rpynnamM (foy). OHH OKa3bIBaOTCA B HENOXOM MOKa3bIBaeT aHaNH3 MOMYYaeMbIX B 3TOM cIlyyae cOOTBeTCTBH C JaHHEIMd MK-cpypre-cuextpocxoMIT3I, cogepxanme ocHopHoro MmpofykTa B HX, uu. OTMeTUM, YTO cOcTaBIsFOlad B CpeqHeM 0 ©KaK MpaBusio, npesbiutaeT 99%; Ba TakuXx NpHMepa BC€M JaHHbIM fo = 0.98 + 0.05 yKa3bIBaeT Ha cooTC pa3HbiIMd MM jaHbI B WenAX COMOCTaBIeHHA B Betcrsue MIT9T copmyse (1) u orcytcrsve B Hux Ta6N. 1. He cneyeT, oqHako, 3a0bIBaTb, YTO TOY3HaAUHMTeNbBHOH npumMecn TIOT. HOCTb CaMHx onpefeneHun cbyHKWHOHaTbHOCTH Bpay mH Bbie 1%, Hakoueu, euje Gonee 4eTKHM KPHTepHeM Takoro COOTBETCTBHA ABIAeTCA OanaHc OGe€HX KOHIeBbIx rpylil B NosMMepe, IpsxMO onpefemaeMbIH 43 AMPMemaxpuaamnote maxpomonomepot 190 ciekTpa. Halo OTMeTUTS, YTO MPH aHaH3e cleKTpa U UX NOAUMEPDI MT9P, aBisatouleroca MH]MBAyasbHbIM BeLecT@®yHKUMOHANbHO OfHOpo_HBIe MITIST sapnatotca BOM, aHHOe OTHOUICHHE OKA3AIOCb HECKOMBKO BBI- —_ g cgoro OUepes[b OCHOBOMI [VIA CHHTe3a APYTHX Npou3me equHMUBI. [ia yCTpaHeHHA 9TOFO HECOOTBETCT- — gogunix IT'9O, cROGORHBIX OT npumeceit IST. B naBUA ObIJ HCMONb3OBaH YaCTO NpHMeHACMBIA Mp Pe- — croginesi paGoTe 9Ta BO3MOXHOCTA HCHONb3OBaHa ructpanuu SAMP-cnektpos nomuMepos TIPHeM == Id MOMYYeHHA CTPOrO MOHOGYHKUMOHAJIBHEIX MeYBCAHMCHHA 3aepKKH MCKAY HMITy1bcCaMi (“telaxpaxpunaTHbix MakpoMoHoMepos IT9O, He cosepxKaation delay”, RD), BruaHue KOTOpol Ha xapakTepHicWWMX OucpyHKUMOHAaNbHBIX aHanoros. Mutepec K TaTHYecKoe OTHOMIeHHe OH : CH; B MT9SI noKka3aHo —_pgy MaKPOMOHOMepaM O6ycIOBseH pajoM OGcTosHWDKe. TebCTB. OAHO H3 HHX — HefaBHHH CHHTe3 CeTUATHIX RD.c 0 5 10 20 TISO nytem payukasbHOH NOMMepH3al[MH B BOHOK ‘ cpefle HX aHasloroB C (PyHKIUMOHAaJIbHOCTBIO M0 MeTa(OH]:(CH3] 1.07 1.02 1.0 1.0 KpWaTHbIM rpyrmaM (fya) OT 1.2 go 1.8 [16, 17]. McCileOBaHHe STHX CETOK NOKa3aJlO, UTO B HX MOBEseB janbHeliliem Mpl perucTpaliMH CNeKTPOB MCNOMbHH 3HAYWTebHad POMb NPHHAaAWeEXUT NOMMdpyHK30BamH RD = 10 c. Benwununi oTrHomeHuit OH : CH, IWHOHAIIbHbIM Y31aM pasBeTBIICHHA, o6pa3yloluMca CHHTe3HpoBaHHbIx MITSI (ta6a. 1) oKa3biBaroTca nomuMepw3alMe KOHUeBLIX rpymm. EcrectBeHHO BeCcbMa OJIM3KHMH K e]MHHe, ITO MOATBEPKAaeT NpeANONOXKUT, YTO B BOMHBIX Cpefjax rupospoGupie CACaHHbIM BbIe BbIBOM OO MX CyHKUMOHaIbHOH nomuMeTakpwiaTHble (IIMA) emu qomKHDbI cyuyeofHOposHOcTH. OH HaxO[ATCA B Pa3sHTeJIbHOM KOHCTBOBATb B CBEpHYTOM, rno6ynapHo cpopMe, ofHaTpacte C aHaJIOrHUHbIMH JaHHbIMH JIA KOMMEp4ecKO HH JJIMHa 3THX Weteli (AHade TOBOpsA, CTeMeHb N0kux MIT9I, B KoTopbix GamaHc KOHUeBbIX py cyHMepH3al{wH MOMMMaKpOMOHOMepa), OfpesesatoI€CTBeHHO HapyllieH NpucyTcrBuem npuMeceHITSI. yaa cbyHKUMOHabHOCTA y3la F, HA HX peasbHoe [IoHATHO, UTO Te Xe OTHOMICHHA MO3BONAIOT paccocTosHHe B HaGyxLle ceTKe ObIH He BNOMHE ACHBI. c4uTaTb aGcomHOTHOe cofepxKaHve MITST, KoTopoe HexoTopoe mpescrapienue 06 aTUX y3u1ax BOSHUKIIO TakxKe aHo B TaGu. |. HefaBHO pH TeOpeTHYeCKOH TpaKTOBKe yupyrux HavOonee CBOHWCTB TaKHX C€TOK, NPHYeM OLCHeHHbIe BeEIM4HPOAHEIX No cbyHKUMOHAIbHOCTHNpaMbIM MeTOJOMOHTOMepHbIXaHaW3a HEOMHO-CHCoy F 6pin nopagKa 200-300 [22]. TeM ABIIACTCA KUAKOCTHAaA XpoMaTOrpacuA B Tak EcTecTBeHHbIM ABJIACTCA 2KeaHHe BbIACHUTb 9TH Ha3bIBaeMbIX KPHTHY4eCKHX ycnoBHAX (14, 21]; sTOT BONpOcbI Ha paCTBOPHMbIX MO/[eJIAX, MOJYYaeMbIx NOPXoy TakxKe Ob MCNOMb30BaH B HacTOAWeH pa6oNoNuMepH3alweH CTporo MOHOYyHKIMOHAIBHBIX Te. ComocTaBsleHve KPHBbIX KOMMep4ecKHX HW CHHTe+=MaKPOMOHOMepos. CaMH M10 ceGe TaKHe NOHMMepbl, 3HpoBaHHbIx MIISI, moka3aHHoe Ha pc. 2, Bpay] WH =CPOPMY KOTOPbIX MOXHO BapbApOBaThb MeX]ly 3Be3HeOOXOAHMO KOMMECHTHpoBaTb. HaliyqeHHbie 43 Ta0- 4 rpeOHeoOpa3HO IpH H3MeHeHHH TepMoyMHaKOrO poya KpuBbIX FomH MITSE oKa3biparotTca 0- MHYECKOFO CpOACTBa pacTBOpUTeNA K eNAM OGOHX CTaTOUWHO GOJIH3KHMH K BbIMMCIICHHbIM M3 CeKTpoB Tunos, T.c. II9O u IIMA, npegcraBnart camoctosBbICOKOMOJIEKYJIAPHbIE COEHHHEHHA Cepua A tTom42 N6 2000 

921 

**==> picture [301 x 13] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
CTPOrO MOHO®YHKIJMOHAJIBHBIE METHJIOBbIE S®HPbI<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**==> picture [396 x 200] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
oe A el [ee] ee i<br>2 3 4 5 2 3 4 5<br>hh ” ae<br>ee Ss ee jy ——————ee ee a<br>2 3 4 5 2 3 4 5<br>Vans MJ<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Puce. 2. KuykocTubie xpoMaTOorpaMME! B KPHTHYeCKHX YCHOBHAX KOMMep4deckHKX (a, B) H MOMYYCHHbIX AHHOHHOH nonuMepusanneii (6, r) MITOL c M = 2000 (a, 6) 1 5000 (8, r). a-r — cooTseTcTBeHHo o6pa3upI A, B, E, AB ta6a. 1. 

TeJIbHbIM HHTepec, OcOGeHHO ec yUeCTb, YTO COwel KoppensayuH c MM 4X yHKUMOHabHOCTBIO MaBPeMeHHBIe BapHaHTHl “KHBOH” paqHKaJIbHOW MOMMKPOMOHOMePOB, XOTA He€3aBHCHMOe KOJIMUECTBeHMepu3anun [23, 24] MOSBONAIOT MONy4aTh aHaNOrH4Hoe OMpeffeneHHe Tex %xe MapamMeTpoB u3 AMP Hble pa3BeTBJICHHbIe MOMMepbI C y3KHM MMP. cieKTpa He BIOuIHe HaylexKHO. Tem He MeHee, HallpuB , Mep, B chyuae MakKpoMoHomepa E (ra6a. 2) pacueT TaOJ. 2 IpHBesjeHbI HEKOTOpBIe XapakTepucTHfF, -u3 OTHOLIeHHA CHTHaNOB MeTaKpunaTHOH rpynnOnyMepmacuan S HM MIPOAYKTOB MX PaguKaNbHOM = Wy 3penbes 1130 env MpHBOAUT K BeH4YHHAaM MepHsalyHu. 0.94 + 0.08, Tora Kak 43 OTHOLIeHHA K Npef_KoHueMakpoMovomepsi GBI OxapakTepu30BaHEI mo BO CH,-rpynme (e B hopmyse (1)) — k 0.98 £0.06. MM u cyHKuMOHaNbHOCTH, KaK 9TO CeNaHO paHbmie B paGorax [16, 17]. HusKoe 3Ha¥eHHe CbyHKIHOBrome yOefuTeNbHble CBU[ETENBCTBA HHMBHHabHOCTH B clydae OGpa3ua XK o6ycnoRmeHo MaAYabHOCTH MaKpOMOHOMepoB No THIy PyHKkuUHOIbIM KOMYECTBOM HcxoqHoro MIIST u Hepo3sMox=Ha@IbHOCTH JlaeT Macc-cnleKTpometpia MALDI-TOF; HOCTBIO OCTHXKCHHA BBICOKOM KOHBepcHu rpyntiOH COOTBeTCTBYIOLIMi ClieKTp NpHBeyeH Ha Puc. 3 B co110 YACTO KHHETHYeECKHM NpWunHaM. TIOCTaBJICHHH CO CHeKTpOM THHHYHOrTO MII9r. IIpeaBapuTenbHbit aHan¥3 CleKTpoB (TOUHOCTh peB cnextpax AMP 'H MakpoMoHoMepos Ha6s0rucTpalM OTHOWeHUA m/z B WaHHOM OGmacTu He WarOTCA MPOABNCHHA MeTAaKPHNATHBIX rpyolr— cHrsmyuuie +1) MoKa3biBaeT, YTO NO ITOH WIkane MHKU Hasibt CH; CH; (c WeHTpoM Mp WeHTpoM Mp Mp 1.41 M.g.) W CH, CH, (apu 5.6 5.6 cyBMHYyTEI {pyr OT Apyra Ha 44 efMHHUBI, T.c. Ha Bewu 6.1 M.q.). Ha kauecrBeHHOM ypoBHe HHTeHCHBJ1H4HHY MM Monomepuoro 3BeHa II3O. B cayyae HOCTh 3THX CHFHaNOB HaxOqMTca B cooTBeTCTByIOMIIDI (cnekTp a) aOcomIOTHbIe 3HaYeHHA MaCC OT| 

B cnextpax AMP 'H MakpoMoHoMepos Ha6s0WarOTCA MPOABNCHHA MeTAaKPHNATHBIX rpyolr— cHrHasibt CH; CH; (c WeHTpoM Mp WeHTpoM Mp Mp 1.41 M.g.) W CH, CH, (apu 5.6 5.6 wu 6.1 M.q.). Ha kauecrBeHHOM ypoBHe HHTeHCHBHOCTh 3THX CHFHaNOB HaxOqMTca B cooTBeTCTByIO- 

BbICOKOMOJIEK YIAPHbIE COERMHEHHA 

Cepuz A tTom42 N6 2000 

|922||||KA3AHCKUHHu|gp.||||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Ta6auua|2. MeTakpunatHbie|Makpomonomeppsi||[130unpopyxTsl HxnonMMepH3anHH|||||
||Makpomonomeppi*|||TIpoaykrb!nonuMepH3aladMakKpOMOHOMepoB**|||||
|B|0.077 | 2040|0.89|Bl|148|74|255|128|-|
||||B2|100|50|185|93|37|
|E|0.146 | 4850|0.98|El|||CiumMTbIitnomHuMep|||
||||E2|400|80|1040|208|50|
|*K|~<br>(5000) ||0.53|Xi|75|15|107|21|-|
||||2|350|70|850|170|44|
|3|0.150 | 5030|0.95|31|191|38|564|113|48|
||||32|292|58|357|71|-|



* [na MaKpoMOHOMepoB NpHHATHI Te *Ke Ba OTHOCHTCA K MAKPOMOHOMEpy, a Ucppapone — K[HOMEeDpy] neue uTo[ONbITAa] 4 quaM0MITOTero NONMMePHsalMH. (ra6n. 1), rorga kak y NpopsyKTOB HX HOMHMepHaayHH OyK** [na NposyKTos NOMMMepH3alHH NPUBeJeHbI ON|peseNeHHbie H3 KpuBbIx PIIX Bennynubt M,,, wicna Berseii B 38e39006pa3Hon MaKpoMovlekyle, a TAKXKeE CpefHero paguyca HHeEpuMH, MpHiem RI a LS oTHocATca COOTBETCTBeHHO K JaHHbIM, MOJYYCHHBIM C pe(ppakToMeTpr4yeckuM AeCTCKTOPOM H FETCKTOPOM CBeTOpaccedHHA. B TI€¢pBOM H3 OIbITOB NOAMMepH3allHlO JaHHOrO MaKPOMOHOMepa MpOBOAH.AH NO” felicTBHeM cucTemMbI K»S,0.—Na7S70, np 30°C, Bo BTopom — nog pelictBvem 4,4'-a30-6uc-4-HaHOBanepHpeermac, %. KHCHOTHI MpH 60°C, Konuentpayua nonuMepa B ONbiTax coctaBaana 20 Mac. %, AcKMO4ad OBIT E2, rye ona Gala paBHa 

HOCATCA K TOMONOraM HMCHHO TaKOH CTpyKTypbl, B ciayyae MaKpOMOHOMepoB c 6oee HH3KOi HecylljuM HoH Na* 43 MaTpHI{bI M uMerouHM M = CpenHeli (byHkKUHOHaTbHOCTIO (HanpHMep, 2K) Macc= 55.03 + 44.0536n, re n—cTeneHb NomumMepu3ayun. CUCKTp ABIACTCA CyNepnosHuMeH o6oux pacmpejeHanpumep, ana muKos 4771, 4815 1 4859 s6nu3zu «= TCH, T.C. MITSI a erS MALDLTOF k OueBuyHo, MaKCHMyMaynHaMn = 107.05; pacueTBI108. Oo dopMyile.05. NPUBOMATTipu K BeIH-4TObyHKlonannaantn IIPHMeHeHHe. METONa Tor pw HaAHHHK cponnerer. HposxyKtTaM paltHaa HeBbICOKO itireweupsoorn wrnocuen, Ka BYFOHICH MPOrPaMMbr aHamHsa cnekTpoB Moxer ee : MOXHO ’ JIMYCCTBEHHO OXapakTepH30BaTh cbyHKuMIO PT KoB CYAUTH MO €€ CABHTY OT OCHOBHOH CepHH TH- — waxpoMOHOMepOB, YTO ABNAETCA MpeAMeTOM GynyHa 16 e{HHMU, K KOMMIeKcaM MaKpOMoNekyl C WHxX HccneqOoBaHuH. Mmerommeca ceftuac B HallieM K*, KOTOpbIit OBL MCNOMB30BaH Mpa CHHTE3¢. pacnopsxKeHum KpuBbie TITX 8 kputTamyueckux ycnoB BHAX Np (BOHHOM JeTeKTHpOBaHHH (YP u pecpakcayuae MakpoOMoHOMepa HaOmiofjaeTca CepHaA TomMeTpuA) NOKA3bIBaIOT, ITO B XOfe CHHTe3a [UMeMHKOB, NpeKpacHo corsacyloujasca c (POpMyNOH MoTakpunaTos IIST c pocroM KoHBepcHH Npoucxo_uT HoMeTakpusiata MIISI (M = 123.11 + 44.0536n); wa- = ocrenenHHeii capur PT® ot ucxoguoro ISIB cronipuMep, MHKH 5279, 5324 uw 5368 onaATb-TaKH BONH3H 4 4=©POHY 3aMeIL[eHHbIX MIpOAyKTOB — MOHO- H J\MMeTAaMaKCHMyMa OTBeYalOT AHHe Wem 117.04; 118.06 1 KpHiaTa, HO KONMYECTBeHHbIC pacueTbI MO 39THM 119.06. B cnyuae MaKpoMOHOMepa, NpHHUMasA BO cpparMeHTapHbIM JaHHbIM MpexkeBpeMeHHEI. BHUMaHHe TOUHOCTh H3MepeHHit, pesybTaT BIONHE Tlepexona K nOnMaKpomoHomepam, oTMeTuM ComocTaBuMK coxkaleHHtoC aieJaHHbIMHacnonaraatBUCKO3HMeTpHHsoon perers(TAadI.10: 2).on MPCANE BCCTO, ITO THOAMMEPH3aTHA MaRPOMOHOMC-, a P Gore [25 yronk pa E, nony4enxoro 13 KoMMepyeckoro MITSI, nelictnporpaMMoii (Kak, HanipuMep, B paGoTe [25]), MBI HE — Buvenino MpHBOMUT K CLIMTOMY TlonuMepy, a nIpH 6oMO2XKeM paccuHTaTb H3 Macc-cileKTpa WiMpHHy MMP, nee HM3KHX KOHIeHTpallMAx, BO3MOXKHO, ~ K CBepxOfHaKO BbIGOpOUHBIe ONCHKH 10 HEKOTOPbIM TIWKaM Pa3BeTBJICHHOMy NMONHMepy WH MMKpOreJiio, 4TO NOKa3bIBalOT, UTO OHO HECKOJIBKO WIKpe pacipeszeo6ycnoBneHo HasIM4HeM B HEM JOCTaTOYHO BbICOKOH nenua Ilyaccona, 4TO BHONHe OGEIMHO ANA NpakTHjoONM pasBeTBIAFOWero AAMeTakpunata I13O. [o4YeCKHX CHHTe30B 9cpupos ITST. HOOHbIC ABJICHHA HMCIOT MECTO MIP BBICOKHX KOH- 

BLICOKOMOJIEKYJIAPHBIE COEDMHEHHMA CepuaP A tom42 M6 2000 

CTPOTO MOHO®YHKIJHMOHAJIBHBIE METWJIOBbIE I®MPbI 

923 

**==> picture [12 x 10] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
(a)<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**==> picture [367 x 280] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
1 | f<br>enna<br>a a OO as<br>4000 4500 5000 5500 mlz<br>(6)<br>Pha<br>| (<br>OT<br>4500 5000 5500 6000 m/z<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Puc. 3. Macc-cnextpp1 MALDI-TOF tunuunoro MIISIP (a) 4 MakpomoHomepa IT19390 (6, o6pa3en 3, Ta6a. 2). Och aOciHcc lala B eMHHUax OTHOMIEHHA Macchi m NouMMeproMosOra K 3apaly z mpu z= | (Na* B Ka4ecTBe 3apsKaFOWeTO HOHA). 

IeHTpalliax H B Cly4ae MAaKPOMOHOMEepa 3, BHcxOf4HHe B padoTax NOCeqHHX eT NO NoNMMepH3aljHH HOM MII9I kotoporo uMeetca HEGONbUIad IPHMe€Cb ~=MAaKPOMOHOMEpOB IMIpPeCHMYLIeCTBCHHO HCIOMb3y!OT TISPr. XPOMaTOrpa*H1o, MO3BONIAIOWYIO KOJIMYeCTBEHHO B Tex xe ycHOBHAX CHHTe3 Ha OCHOBe PyHKWHOoun nexowetEmx anasoMonomepos npn me BIpHCyTCHaNbHO OJHOPOAHbIX MeTaKpuaToB MII93T npusoHHH "lo mokazarento I enomnenit vsneropecced. AMT K paCTBOPUMBIM MpOAyKTaM, 4TO HOMycKaeT WX eons —we ° Kor BeTOpacceaHCCHeROBAHE MPHHATHIMH [JIA PasBeTBICHHBIX NO4 6 ret [27 28] POM TAKOTO HOAXONA ABIAAMMeposB MeTOAaMH [26]. B nacroamjei paGote sTu cA pavo oa NPOLYKThI Npe_BapHTesIbHO OXapaKTepH30BaHbI HC[na oneuku MM u, ci Bo3MoxKHO, CTpoeHHa TIpoKJIOUNTEMBHO C MOMOLIbIO PTIX. Hero B TOM, YTO — pyKToB nomMMepH3allMM MaKpOMOHOMEpoB ITO HaMH M3MCPCHHA CTAMOHaPHBIMH MeTOAaMH, HallpHMePp — ycnomb30BaHa [TIX c Bool B KauecTBe 9I10eHTA C TOM ra30cpa3HOl OCMOMeTPHH, CBETOPacceaHUA WIM BUCKOxe KomOwHalleit peTeKTopos. Ha puc. 4 mpuBefeHbt SHMeTPUM TpeGy!0T KONMYECTBCHHOFO OTFENEHHA NOx pyREre [TIX 1d HEKOTOPbIX CHHTE3HPOBAaHHbIX 06IHMaKPOMOHOMEPOB KaK OT HCXO/JHbIX MAKPOMOHOMEpasion. pos, TaK H (B cilyuae CpeyqHecIeHHOH MM) or Gosee HH3KOMOJICKYJIAPHBIX IpwMecei. JlaHHaa npowexypa B nepsom cnyyae (ta6n. 2, o6pa3ey B1) sugHo, ABNACTCA BECbhMA TPYOCMKOH HW TpeGyeT 3HadHTeIb4UTO KOHBEPCHaA MaKPOMOHOMEepa ABIAeTCA NpakTHHoro KOMYeCTBa MONMMepa. MMeHHO No 3TOH MpH4eCKH NOMHOM: WIOWab OX MHKOM MomuMepa B O6- 

BbICOKOMOJIEKYJIAPHbIE COEHHHEHHA Cepux A tom42 N6 2000 

**==> picture [503 x 360] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
924 KA3AHCKHAu op.<br>i (a) f ) ( (s)<br>| i! |<br>| 1 | \<br>| \ yA | \<br>| yA | \<br>i} \ }  \\ HY<br>Q _ ——_ > ~ ~ aw Es .<br>be15 20 25 30ee35 a 15 ee20 SO 25Sh A 30SN35 A 15 20 25 30 35<br>. Van MII<br>Puc. 4. Kpuppie PITX mponyktos noauMepv3alHu MakKpomoxHomepos Bil (a), E2 (6) 4 XK2 (B). CnonHbIe KpuBbie<br>OTHOCATCA K HETCKTOPY NOKa3zaTesA MIpeIOMJICHHA, WITPHXOBbIe — K JJETCKTOPy CBETOPacceaAHHA.<br>nactu M = 2000 cocrapnsaeT He Gonee 10% oT BceH MOMMMAaKPOMOHOMEPOB JlexKaT CTaTHCTHYECKH HIDKe<br>AHOIMIOWayH wiexO6pa3zlla,omoro. NDIYTO e MaxponNPHMepHO OTBEUaeTomnepe. B euie- kpupoli (s’),,1/2 =(M,,) sia TMHettHOTo TIO. Ouenkn<br>GoubLIeli CTeNeHH 3TO OYeBHIIHO B cIy4ae OOpazija E2, "0 9THM AaHHbIM MPHBOAAT, OWHAKO, K BeuM4HHaM<br>KOTOpbili NOMy4eH 43 MaKpoMoHOMepa c NOYTH Mpe- PAKTOpa pasBeTBNEHUA g = (S)parp/(S”)mm ~ 0.3-0.4 HB<br>WebHOM cbyHKUMOHaNbHOcTHIO. TlonHad KOHBepcuaA CBOIO OYepesb K UcIy BeTBelt NopagKa 10~-15 ana He-<br>XapakTepHa H Jia MakpoMoHoMepa X (puc. 3B), of- PeTYJIAPHBIX, T.e. MomMAMCHepcHbIx 3Be3q [26]. STH<br>HaKO H3-3a €rO HH3KOM (yHKUMOHAIBHOCTH coflep- AaHHble yCrylatoT MOUTH NOpsAOK BeM4HHaM F, 110-<br>Kane octaTouHoro MITSL B koHeyHon cmMecH Be- JIYYeCHHbIM HeMOCpefCTBeHHO M3 XPOMaTOrpaMM.<br>HKO (oKomI0 50%).<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Bonlee crporve pacuetThi Hf CieKyJIALMH, OTHOCALLIHeca K pa3Mepam oOpa3yrolyxca NpH NOMMepH3aln MAaKPOMOHOMEePOB, MpesMONOXKUTEbHO 3Be3,000pa3HbIx IIQO, Ha 9TOM ypoBHe Bpx 1M MpaBomMepubl. V3BeCTHO, ITO H3-3a GoNee BbICOKOM TIOTHOCTH CerMeH_TOB CTeleHb HaOyxaHua Jy4eli MOMMepHbIXx 3Be3f, KaK B §-TOUKe, WIA KOTOPOM cipaBeyIHBO GOMbIIMHCTBO HCHONL3YeMbIX YpaBHeHHH, TaK HM BalW OT Hee, BbIae, 4eM y CBOOOMHbIX KyOKoB. B pe3ybTate 9TOFO B BOMe, ABIAFOLelicA XOPOWIMM PacTBOpHTeseM MIA = [T9O, ux pa3Mepbl JOJDKHbI COWKATLCA, YTO MOHHsaeT pacueTHble BeIHYHHBI g. 

Una oueuku MM npogykTos nomuMepu3alluv B TlepBOM NpHOAWKEHHH MOXKHO MCNOMb3OBaTb NOOX%KCHHE BbICOKOMOJICKYAAPHOrO MHKa KpHBOM Mp pecbpakTOMeTpHyecKOM JjeTeKTHPOBaHHM. Kak BHJHO H3 Ta6u. 2, MOMyYaeMble TAKUM OOpa30M CTeIeHH NOJMMepH3allMH MOMMMaKPOMOHOMepoOB He CIIMIIKOM BbICOKH. OueBH HO, TO 3TH BENHUMHDI OIDKHbI ObITh 3aHWOKEHbI B CBA3H C CyYLIIECTBeEHHO Oosee KOMMaKTHOM KOHopMalivMei pa3BeTB/ICHHbIX NONHMepoOB B CpaBHeHHH C klyOKaMH HX JIMHeHHBIX aHaioTOB, HMCHOJIL3OBaHHbIX JIA KanMOpoBkH. STo fiolTBEpxKAaeTCA JaHHbIMH, MOJYYCHHbIMH C }eTeKTOPOM cBeTOpacceaHHa, Tye aOcOuIOTHBIe MM MM oka3biBaloTca CyIecTBeHHO Gomee BbICOKUMH. CaM 10 ceOe hakT Takoro pacxoxjleHHa MM MM mpeyctaBiaetca cepbe3HbIM, XOTA H KOCBCHHbIM CBHJICTCJIBCTBOM B MOJIb3y 3Be3,000pa3HOH pa3sBeTBICHHOM CTpyKTypbI OOpaSYIOLMXCA HOJMMAaKPOMOHOMEPOB. 

cBeTOpacceaHHa, Tye aOcOuIOTHBIe MM MM oka3biBaloTca TakuM 06pa30M, XOTA HMeIOMHeCaA SKCHeEpHMeHCyIecTBeHHO Gomee BbICOKUMH. CaM 10 ceOe hakT TasIbHble JaHHble He NOSBOMALOT CTpOro yCcTaHOBHTb Takoro pacxoxjleHHa MM MM mpeyctaBiaetca cepbe3KOHQOpMal|HIO MaKpOMOJIeKyI MposyKTOB pajuHbIM, XOTA H KOCBCHHbIM CBHJICTCJIBCTBOM B MOJIb3y KajIbHOM MOJHMEpH3allMH MeTaKpHaTHbIX MaKpo3Be3,000pa3HOH pa3sBeTBICHHOM CTpyKTypbI OOpaMmonomepos IT3O, oHv KOCBeHHO CBHJeETEIBECTBYIOT SYIOLMXCA HOJMMAaKPOMOHOMEPOB. B HOMb3y AX 3Be3006pa3HO CTPyKTypbI C UMCIOM Ha nyuett oT 15 70 200. Kak oTMe4deHo BbIIle, TAKOH Xax KOMIaKTHYIO KOHCOpMalMIO YKa3bIBalOT pax rep CrpyKTypbI THX HOMMMEPOB B BOPHO! cpere Takxke 3Ha4ueHHA pasHycOB HHepuHH (s’) » , CKOMb © OGYCIIOBIEH Pe3KHM KOHTpacToM Mexk/ly THApoCpoo6b! cbparMeHTapHBIMH OH He 6b. B yenax comocHbIMM MOMMMeTaKpHaTHBIMH LemaAMu, o6pa3ylolliu2 12 . MH APO 3Be3/bl, H PAAPOCPHALHBIMH Jy4yamu [T9O. TaBsICHHA 3ABMCHMOCTS (S’)~ OT MM fia MHHeHHO~Hayo cKa3aTb, ITO B cirydae NOMMMaKPpOMOHOMEpoB ro ITSO 6pina Nomy4eHa MyTeM aHasH3a BbICOKOMO[IC jaxe B xopomleM pacTBopuTene aBTopp! [27] jlekyapHo “actu KpuBoi TTX gna W130 c mmpotaxxe cKNOHAIOTCA K MHEHHIO O 3Be3,006pa3Hot xuM MMP (M,, = 1.7 x 10°; M,,/M, = 2.5). PasMepbl crpyKType. 

## BbICOKOMOJIEK YJIAPHbIE COEHMHEHHA 

Cepoxs A Tom 42 NG 2000 

- CTPOrO MOHO®YHKIMOHAIJIBHBIE METHJIOBBIE 3S@HPbI 925 

- B 3aKmIoyeHHe HeOOXOMHMO OTMETHTB, YTO pe2. Harris J.M. // Poly (Ethylene Glycol) Chemistry. 

- aslbHad CHTYalHa IPH payuKaIbHO NOMMepwsallHu New York: Plenum Press, 1992. MaKPOMOHOMEPpOB BBITNIALMT elle Gomee CHOKHOK. 3. Tonyuesa HH. // Ycnexu xumuu. 1980. T. 49. Ne 3. Kak BHJHO, HallpwMep, 43 To xe paGoTEI no IICC. 385. MaKPOMOHOMepaM C MeTaKpHaTHbIMH rpyiiamy, yuimwa Wel pe3Ko Bospacraer oT 3-8 70 30-70 npH 4. Neaneea.H. // Bptcoxomoniek. coeg. A. 1990. T. 32. HavasIbHOM KOHLCHTpallH NONMMepH3yeMbIx py a BOmM3u 0.02 Momb/ 43-34 Mepexofa BOGnactb remb5. ~Dust J.M., Fang Z., Harris J.M. {/ Macromolecules. adbekTa. ITo ABMeHe CTAaHOBUTCA elle GoNee BEI1990. V. 23. Ne 16. P. 3742. PaxKeHHbIM B Cilydae BhICOKOMOJICKYAPHBbIX MAKPO- = 6. -‘De Vos R., Goethals E.J. /{ Polym. Bull. 1985. V. 15. MOHOMEepoB, SaMe/IeHHe peaKI[HH OOpbiBa B TaKOl No 6. P. 547. CHTYaMM NOATBEPANACTCA NPAMBIMH H3MCPCHHAMH = 7. Leonard M., Dellacherie E. /{ Makromol. Chem. 1988. KOHIeHTpalwH MakpopayuKkanos [P*] H KOHCTaHT B. 189. 8. P. 1809. ckopoctu rH6enu k, mpu nomumMepusanun [IC- ([P*] = ee ; = 3.3 x 10 monp/a, k, = 7600 n/Mont c [29]) u IT3O8. Selisto B. Delgado C., FisherD. {/ J. Chromatogr. 1993. MakpoMOHoMepos ([P*] = 4 x 10°, k, = 5400 [30]) c ee THM,MeTaKpWlaTHBIMH KOHIeBbIMA rpynnamu. Orme9: ZmuypinaHB.. Oocannuxoga C.B., Tieavpep uM 4TO NpuBeeHHbIe BeNMUHHEI [P*] Ha ~2 m0Rasanceuit ‘ 4 BICOKOMOMIEK. coe. A. 1980. 

- pAqKa BbIWe, 4M XapakTepHble [A MOMMMepH3a6 eee . MH “MaJIbIX” MOHOMEPOB B CpaBHMMbIX ycoBHax. 10. Kasancxuit K.C., Kamuncxuii A.4., Timuypina H.B., B 2Tol CBA3H MOXHO MpeANONOXUTb, 4TO TIpH NepePomanoea B.C., Tonuueea H.H. // Bricokomonek. xojle K TpexMepHOit NOMMMepu3al|H MaKPOMOHOMecoeg. A. 1987. T. 29. Ne 10. C. 2219. pos, T.€. K COBHAM (POPMHPOBaHHA CETKH, KBaPa11, Conoevanoe A.A., Kasanckutt K.C. /{ BbicoKomomek. TH4HaA THOeNb 3Be3q000pa3HbIX MaKpopay{UKasOB, coen. A. 1970. T. 12. 9. C. 2114. (PHKCHpOBaHHBIX B Be ce y310B, ee Gomee 3a., . TpyqHeHa. OueBHHO, YTO aHasIH3 JaHHBIX M10 BesIN12. neanskitay OP bienielis SG. i! Eur. 4HHaM CTeMeHH MOMMMepH3alHH NMOMMMaKPOMOHOym. ee , MepoOB B pacrsBope HB ceTKe noTpeGyer yetanm3anuu 13. y6poeccuii CA. Kymnanenxo HUB. Toavopala achekTOB MeXaHH3Ma MX NOJMMepH3anMH, Ha 6epe B.M., Kazancxuii K.C. // Bbicoxomonex. coep. A. 4TO HacTosad pa6ota, GesyCOBHO, He IIpeTeHyer. 1975. T. 17. Ne 12. C2733. Onuum 13 B bIX MpenapaTuBHEIX cneqcTBuit 14. Entelis S.G., Evreinov V.V., Gorshkov A.V. /f Adv. 

- aHasiM3a MexaHH3MaKH OOpa30BaHHa ceTuaTEIx ITSO Polym. Sci. 1986. V. 76. P. 129. aABWIICA Obl TakoKe BbIGOp H MCNONb3OBAaHHe NOLXopA15. Lapienis G., Penczek S. // J. Bioactive and Compatible WUX NepefaTaHKOB WelH WK CHCTeM, HHMHEpytOPolymers (in press). ax “OKUBy!0” pakUKasbHY!O NOMHMEpH3al{HlO MeTAa16. Kasancxuii K.C., Cxypudun CI’, Kysneyoea B.H., KpWlaTHbIX KOHUeBbIX rpynn. O6a sTux noyxoma Eedoxumoe 10.M. // Bpicoxomosek. coen. A. 1996. MOFyT JJaTb BOSMOXHOCTh Goslee THOKO H TOYUHO peT. 38. Ne 5. C. 875. ry1MpOBaTb BENM4YHHbI F W COOTBETCTBEHHO MIOT47 Kasqucxuii K.C Ty6poeckuti C.A., AnmowenHOCTb H CROLicTBa OGpasylomleiica CeTKH. xo H.B. // Betcoxomosek. coey. A. 1997. T. 39. Ne 5, Pa6ota BbINOJIHeHa B COOTBeTCTBHH Cc IIporpamC. 816. 

- MOH Hay4HOro coTpyqHHyectBa Poccuiickoi uw Womb18. Goldwasser J.M., Adolf H.G. /{ Polym. Eng. Sci. 1986. cKoH akayleMHi Hayk Ha 1996-1998 rr. Poccuiicxaa V. 26.Ne 21. P. 1510. rpyniia aBTopos Oslarogapur Poccuiickult ous PYH19 nuda A., Florjanczyk Z., Hofman A., Slomkowski S., HAaMCHTANBHBIX HCcHeAOBAaHH (KOA Mpoekta 98-03Penczek S. // Macromolecules. 1990. V. 23. Ne 6. 33325) 3a YacTHUHy!IO CPuHAHCOBy!O Nop epxKy paP. 1640. OoTEI. ABTOpbI BbIpaxkaroT TiyOokylo MpH3HaTesb. HoctbM MaKPOMOJIeKyAPHBIX §-py C. CocnosckomyHccne_OBaHuit (Lleutp MonekynapHErx FIAH) 3a no20. eeeereda yeanos H..B.,HfKymnanenxo Beicoxomonek.H.B.,coen.KazaucxutiA. 1976. T.K.C.,18. MOILI[b B PCrHCTpallH HW aHasiH3e XPOMAaTOrpamMC [feoo ° TCKTOPOM cBeTOpaccesHHaA. 21. Gorshkov AV., Much H., Becker H., Pasch H., Evreinov V.V., Entelis S.G. /f J. Chromatogr, 1990. V. 523. Ne 1.P.91. 

- CncOK JMTEPATYPBIu 22. Hy6époeckui C.A, Paxoea [.B., Tazymuna M.A., An- 

- 1. Harris J.M. // 3. Macromol. Sci., Rev. Macromol. Chem. mowexnxo H.B., Bacuavee B.B., Kasancxuii K.C. || Phys. 1985. V. 25, Ne 3. P. 325. Bricoxomoniek. coen. A. 1999. T. 41. Ne 3. C. 527. 

## BBICOKOMOJIEKYJIAPHbIE COENMHEHHA 

Cepna A Tom42 M6 2000 

926 

## KASAHCKMHHu op. 

23. Coca S., Jasieczek C.B., Beers K.L., Matyjaszewski K.// J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Chem. 1998. V. 36. Ne 9. P. 1417. 

24. Wang J.B., Huang J.L. {/ Macromolecules. 1998. V.31. Ne 13. P. 4057. 

25. Bahr U., Deppe A., Karas M., Hillenkamp F. // Anal. Chem. 1992. V. 64. Ne 22. P. 2866. 

26. Roovers J. // Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and Engineering / Ed. by Mark H. 1985. V. 2. P. 478. 

27. Tsukahara Y., Mizuno K., Segawa A., Yamashita Y. |/ Macromolecules. 1989, V. 22. Ne 4. P. 1546. 

28. Tsukahara Y., Tsutsumi K., Yamashita Y., Shimada Sh. |/ Macromolecules. 1990. V. 23. Ne 25. P. $201. 

29. Tsukahara Y., Tsutsumi K., Yamashita Y., Shimada S. |/ Macromolecules. 1989. V. 22. Ne 6. P. 2871. 

30. Nomura E., Ito K., Kajiwara A., Kamachi M. // Macromolecules. 1997. V. 30. Ne 10. P. 2811. 

## Strictly Monofunctional Methyl Ethers of Poly(ethylene glycol) and the Related Methacrylate Macromonomers 

K. S. Kazanskii*, G. Lapienis**, V. I. Kuznetsova*, L. K. Pakhomova*, V. V. Evreinov*, 

## and S. Penczek** 

*Semenov Institute of Chemical Physics, Russian Academy of Sciences, ul. Kosygina 4, Moscow, 117977 Russia 

**Center ofMolecular and Macromolecular Studies, Polish Academy of Sciences, 

**==> picture [162 x 10] intentionally omitted <==**

Abstract—Monomethyl ethers of poly(ethylene glycol) with M = 2000 and 5000 and free of PEG admixtures were prepared by the living anionic polymerization of ethylene oxide under the action of alcoholate of methyl ether of triethylene glycol. Their molecular characteristics and purity were studied by gas-phase osmometry, IR and 'H NMR spectroscopy, and liquid chromatography under critical conditions. With respect to the content of monomethyl ethers of PEG (according to NMR spectroscopy, this value is 96.8-99.4%), the resulting polymers are close to the polymers prepared by the chromatographic purification of their commercial analogs (97.1-99.9%), which contained up to 25% PEG before purification. Methacrylation of homogeneous methyl ethers of PEG yielded macromonomers with a functionality not exceeding 1.0. Preliminary experiments showed that polymerization of these macromonomers leads to soluble polymers, whereas macromonomers prepared from the commercial methyl ethers of PEG and containing crosslinking dimethacrylate give rise to the crosslinked polymers. A preliminary characterization of the soluble products was performed. Their hydrodynamic parameters in an aqueous medium are consistent with a compact, presumably star-shaped structure of macromolecules, and the number of arms for various samples ranges from 25 to 120. These estimates are close by an order of magnitude to the data derived from the study of the elastic behavior of PEO hydrogels, in which similar star-shaped fragments play the role of network junctions. 

BbICOKOMOJIEKYJIAPHBIE COEMMHEHHA = Cepua A Tom42 M6 2000 

