Polymer Vol. 39 No. 3, pp. 697-702, 1998 Printed in Great© Britain.1997 Great© Britain.1997© Britain.1997 Britain.19971997 ElsevierAlll rightsScience reservedLtd 0032-3861/97/$17.00+0.00 

ED aa Polymer Vol. 39 No. 3, pp. é i 4 Printed in Great© Britain.1997 Great© Britain.1997© Britain.1997 Britain.19971997 ELSEVIER PII: S0032-3861(97)00282-6 General mechanism of the chromatography of macromolecules: Experimental test of the universal nature of adsorption effects A. A. Gorbunov?*, L. Ya Solovyova? and A. M. Skvortsov” *State Research Institute for Highly Pure Biopreparations, 7 Pudozhskaya, 197110 St. Petersburg, St. Petersburg,g Russiaaprep »Chemical Pharmaceutical Institute, 14 Prof. Popova, 197022 St. Petersburg, St. Petersburg, Russia (Revised 1 April 1997) Chromatographic data have been obtained for polyethylene glycols, polypropylene glycols, and polyvinylpyrrolidones, based on the use of four different adsorbents at different temperaturesp and pH values of aqueous buffer polymers,eluents. Theaccountingexperimentalfor resultsadsorptionare interpretedinteractions.Tp fromComparisonthe standpointPbetweenof a generalexperimenttheoryandoftheory chromatographyhas made ofit possible to determine the adsorption interaction parameter, c, and the mean thickness of long adsorbing macromolecules, H, at different pH values and temperatures for various polymer—adsorbent systems. According to the theory, the parameter U = (K — Kgpc)/(1 — Kgpc) is a universal function of the product of gyration radius R and adsorption parameter c. In fact, the entire set of experimental data fit the same U versus cR relationship. Predicted from theory, the universal character of manifestation of adsorption effects in the chromatography of polymers has been tested experimentally for most diverse systems, viz. polymers of various chemical nature and molecular weights, adsorbents having various structures and pore sizes, aqueous and organic eluents, as well as for different methods to realize and change adsorption interactions. © 1997 Elsevier Science Ltd. 

## (Keywords: water-soluble polymers; chromatography; adsorption effects) 

INTRODUCTIONIt is well known that under GPC conditions the distribution onlyton. y effectsone universalmanifest. Pparameter.themselvesThism. meansthe chromatographythat the adsorp-of coefficient of macromolecules, Kgpc, depends on one polymers in an universal manner, independent of the di ionl ter: th or f , lecule size R method, in which the adsorption interactions are realized. mension rs Parameter: the tahio of molecule size to In the literature!!! the general theory of chromatography pore size d’. It is the universal Kgpc versus R/d relationship f lecul d with the experimental that determines the size exclusion effect in the chromato° masromo ecules was compare? w &xP graphy of polymers under GPC conditions. data”’* derived from chromatography of polystyrenes on At the same time, changes in the chromatographic macroporous glasses at varied temperatures and mixed conditions (such as adsorbent or solvent changes, temperaorganic solvent compositions. Various modes of chromatoture or pH variations, etc.) leading to the emergence of Braphic benaviour TaN’ Phot pov ont Mears adsorption forces will entail changes in the mechanism of solupie polymers Alougah the cata presente chromatography*~> . Up to a certain critical value of the have not been quantitatively compared with the theory, adsorption interaction parameter, the molecular weight these oat seem to be in a qualitative agreement with the sequence of elution of macromolecules corresponds to the oe The scent is devoted to the more detailed elution sequence in GPC, but the universal law character© present paper 3s cevole ue istic for GPC no longer holds under these changed examination of mechanisms involved in the chromatograconditions, and the chromatographic behaviour of macrophy of water-soluble polymers based on the use of different molecules becomes dependent upon the adsorption interacadsorbents and vane Pees and sauceMe utfer tions®’. After the critical level of adsorption interactions is eruent Pri Values. We Cemons very reached, the molecular weight sequence of elution of different chromatographic systems can be characterized macromolecules becomes even opposite to that of under unambiguously by the same adsorption Jnteraction paraGPC conditions, this fact being typical for adsorption meter, and that the adsorption effects in these systems chromatography “of polymers actually do manifest themselves in the same universal A general theory of chromatography of macromolecules, manner. unitsaccountingover porefor thewalls,effectshas ofbeenadsorptiondeveloped®”.ofpolymericAccordingchainto EXPERIMENTAL this theory. he adsorption “leccubed y th me chroma” The following compounds were studied for their chromatography oF polymers may be described wi € use of the graphic behaviour: polyethylene glycols (PEG) from Fluka (Buchs, Switzerland), Loba (Wien, Austria), and Ferak *To whom correspondence should be addressed (Berlin, Germany), with molecular weights up to 4°%"10* 

POLYMER Volume 39 Number 3 1998 697 

Adsorption effects in chromatography of polymers: A. A. Gorbunov et al. low molecular weight polypropylene*glycols (PPG) from (a) \ Aldrich Chemical Company Inc. (Milwaukee, WI, USA); polyvinylpyrrolidones*PVP) with molecular weights from 20 10°10" to 24°<10*"from Fluka. Four different adsorbents were used. The first was BUtYE Teyopearl™650™M (with particle size 45™90%M) from 2 TOYASSODA (Tokyo, Japan). Three other adsorbents 15 used were of Russian make. These were cross-linked 3 copolymers of methacrylic acid and butyl methacrylate, K differing one from another in the proportions of the 2 A 4 constituent monomeric components’. Their generic name 1.0 is SOEOZA, and a specific adsorbent is suffixed to denote y S 5 the molar percentage of the butyl methacrylate present. We \d 6 used three adsorbents from this series: SOEOZA™K®0: SOEOZA"K=33 (particle size about 200m), and SOLOZA Osh 35 5 45 43 KG=8"(particle"size"60=80 7m)" SOLOZA “adsorbents “are , : log M slightly swellablein water. The pore sizes of all adsorbents were determined by the (b) dextran-based GPC porosimetry method”’. This chromato3 5 graphic method permits adsorbent investigations in the presence of liquid mobile phase, under conditions identical 1 with, or close to, conditions of practical usage, which is of particular importance for swellable polymeric adsorbents. The pore diameters determined in this way were within 20~ 28 nm. GPC porosimetric measurements did not reveal K 3 appreciable variation of pore structure parameters in the 4 studied range of temperature and pH of mobile phase. eA The experiments were carried out on a chromatographic 1 BoRx installation comprising a Model 12000 Varioperpex peri4 staltic pump (LKB, Bromma, Sweden) and a Model R 401 differential refractometer (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a Model 2066 two-channel potentiometric 0 recorder from LKB. The columns used were 20% 2 3 4 long, #mmid., and 50mm long, POM id. The flow rate log M was @:2nlmMit™, sample size 102307, polymer concenFigure 1 Distribution coefficient versus molecular weight for PEG experimentscases), with Butyl-Toyopearl, and @*PM in all other 43°C and pHvalues of 3.9 (1),4.6 (2), 5.2 (@)pSe8(4), 6.5 (5), and 8.8 (6); The retentionwith pH andvolumes,temperatureV, of thevaried.polymers studied were parameter—0.084 nm™'c values:(6); (b)0.1temperature(1), 0.066 (2),22°€ 0.032and (3), pH 0:0013%4),values of —0.0315 (1), 5.5 (5),(2), and6 determined from the maxima of the chromatographic peaks, (3), 6.5 (4); ¢ = 0.95 (1), 0.5 (2), 0.28 (3), and — 0.37 nm' (4), Solid lines and the distribution coefficients K were calculated from the show the theoretical relationships (equations (1)-(3)) formula K =(V — Vo)/(V, — Va), where Vy and V, are the retention volumes for high molecular weight dextran (M = 40 X 10°) and glucose, respectively. The typical values for As may be seen from Figures 1-4, pH and temperature these reference volumes were: Vp =~ 1.8 ml, V,; =~ 3.4 ml variations, as well as polymer and adsorbent changes, lead for the Butyl-Toyopearl 650 M adsorbent, and Vp = 0.9 ml, to changed adsorption interactions, resulting in changes in VY. = 115ml for the SOLOZA adsorbents. Each the aspect and nature of the K versus M relationship. polymer fraction was chromatographed three to five times; In our experiments we observed all known chromatothe statistical error for K values was estimated as about 2— graphic modes for polymers, viz. the GPC mode realizable 5%. in the absence of adsorption interactions; GPC-like modes complicated by adsorption effects, with weak adsorption RESULTS interactions (characteristic of these modes, just as of GPC, is AND DISCUSSION decreasing K with increasing M); chromategraphy=under Figure 1 shows molecular weight dependencies of the eritical"conditions’when"K"=""; and, finally, adsorption distribution coefficients at various pH values for PEG chromatography characterized by increasing K with increasmacromolecules chromatographed using Butyl-Toyopearl ing M. 650 M adsorbent at 43°@ (Figure Ja) and SOLOZA K-33 , ; ; . adsorbent at 22°@ (Figure Ib). Figure 2 gives chromatoTheoretical interpretation and calculation of the adsorption graphic results for PEG and three adsorbents: Butylinteraction parameter Toyopearl (Figure 2a), SOLOZA K-33 (Figure 2b), and A general theory of chromatography of polymers, SOLOZA K-0 (Figure 2c). These results were obtained at accounting for adsorption interactions, has been developed®. fixed pH, but at different temperatures. Similar relationships According to this theory, distribution coefficient K is a are represented in Figure 3 for PVP at several pH values and function of two dimensionless parameters: g=R/d and a temperature of 22°C, and in Figure 4, for a PPG— IT'=—cR, where R is the radius of gyration of a SOLOZA KG-8 system at pH 5 and several different macromolecule, d is the pore radius of an adsorbent, and c temperatures. is the measure of the adsorption interaction in the system. 

698 POLYMER Volume 39 Number 3 1998 

Adsorption effects in chromatography of polymers: A. A. Gorbunov et al. 

**==> picture [555 x 730] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
(a) :<br>6 1.0 —<————— OOx —>»<br>K<br>2.0 5 ae 3<br>0.5. 4<br>1.5 4<br>K3<br>4<br>1.0 x— x Xa 0 4.0 4.2 44<br>2 log M<br>1 Figure 3. Distribution coefficient versus molecular weight for the PVP-<br>SOEOZA"K233 system at 22° and pH5 (1), 62), 7.1 (3) and 8 (4). Solid<br>0.5 lines: equations (1)-(3) at c = 0.077 (1), 0.038 (2), —0.34 (3) and<br>24 28 3.2 3.6 40 44 —1.25 nm~! (4)<br>log M<br>(b)<br>35<br>34<br>4<br>2<br>K ,2 3<br>(a) x 3<br>fe) a / K A<br>1 2X 1 2 LA 2<br>——& 1<br>1<br>0<br>2 3 4 0<br>log M 2.4 2.8 3.2<br>log M<br>(c) Figure4 Molecular weight dependencies of distribution coefficient in the<br>PPG~SOHOZA"KG"8 system at pH"5 and various temperatures: 5°@"@),<br>13.5°C (2), 15°C (3) and 19.5°C (4). Parameter c values: 0.83 (1), 2.18 (2),<br>2 2.27 (3) and 2.7 nm™' (4). Solid lines: equations (1)—(3)<br>5<br>K 4 . . .<br>where adsorption effects are dominating; @="O"eorresponds<br>1<br>9er,x= 32 offo"chromatosraphy which. is. a compensationunder. critical"conditions,of entropy and enthalpycharacteristiceffects<br>; arising in the course of a macromolecule transition from the<br>eluent into the adsorbent pores. More detailed discussion on<br>0 the physical meaning of the adsorption interaction para-<br>2 3 4 meter will be presented in the last section of this paper.<br>log M At lowg values, i.e. for small macromolecules and wide-<br>: re adsorbents (which is exactly the case realized in our<br>Figure 2 Molecular weight dependencies of distribution coefficient for po a ° t me th c fAdi R £8 ides th<br>PEG chromatographed using Buty Toyopearl"650°NE(a), SOOZAK=33 experiments), the theory presented in Ref. "provides the<br>(b), and SOLOZA"K20"() adsorbents. (a) pH"4% and temperatures of 18°C following expression for the distribution coefficient K of<br>(1), 37°C (2), 40°@3), 43°C (4), 45°C (5), 50°C (6); parameter c values: flexible-chain macromolecules:<br>—2.6 (1), — 0.047 (2), 02019°(3}, 0.066 (4), 0.093 (5) and 0.34 nm! (6); (b)<br>pH" and temperatures of 5°@"(1), 6°C (2), 9°C (3), 18°C (4) and 27°C (5); K = Kopc+ an —Y(P)yJ (1)<br>c = O14), 0.36 (2), 0.53 (3), 0.77 (4) and 0.94 nm™! (5); (c) pH4'S and r<br>temperatures of 8°C (1), 15°C (2), P8%5°@%3), 26°C (4) and 30°C (5); c = h<br>—0.77 (1), —0.12 (2), 0:036°@), 0.24 (4) and 0.36 nm~! (5). Solid lines: where<br>equations (1)—(3) 2<br>Vi<br>The c parameter characterizes the deviation of a and<br>polymer—solvent—adsorbent system from the critical con- _ 2yr7<br>ditions. In GPC mode and in GPC-like chromatography, YP) =exp(")H — ert 1] @)<br>where adsorption effects are negligible or small, the (erf(I’) being the well known probability integral, for which<br>adsorption interaction parameter c is negative; positive detailed tables are available). The theoretical equations (1)—<br>values of c correspond to adsorption chromatography, (3) include two scaling parameters, g and I’, these being<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


POLYMER Volume 39 Number 3 1998 699 

## Adsorption effects in chromatography of polymers: A. A. Gorbunov et al. 

expressible in terms of three parameters, d, R and c: g = R/d, 3 T= —cR. 10 In order to compare theory and experiments, we ; determined the pore radii d of the adsorbents from the GPC-porosimetric measurements, and calculated the mean polymer radii R for macromolecules of each type and molecular weight M, using the formula R= BM*. As a ~ 5 2 rough approximation, we used for each polymer the 'E 1 following values of B and q& at all temperatures and pH = values (PEG: B = 0.016, a = 0.59; PPG: B = 0.018, a = e 0.5; PVP: B = 0.029, a = 0.5). 0 Knowing d and R values, it is possible to compare theory 10 200 30 40 50 and experiment, using c as an adjustable parameter, tec) accounting for adsorption interactions (note that according to the theory, each specified polymer—solvent—adsorbent 05 system at fixed pH and temperature must be describable by the single value of the c parameter, which is the same for Figure 6 Temperature dependence of parameter of adsorption interacmacromolecules of all molecular weights). To compare the tions of PEG macromolecules for the Butyl’ T6yopear!"650 Mradsorbent-at theory with the experimental data and to find the unknown pH™6 (1), the SOLOZA*K*0'adsorbentat pH 4:5°(2), and the SOLOZA K- parameter c, the following procedure was adopted. A 33 adsorbent at pH 5 (3) computer program based on the least squares technique was developed and used to determine a certain value of c (the same for all molecular weights) for each temperature and ) pH value. The c value which provided the best fit of the ara experimental points to the theoretical K versus M relationM 10 ofo ship (calculated using equations (1)—(3)) was selected. 03 The values of the c parameter so determined are indicated A4 ° in the captions of Figures 1-4, while the corresponding 5 & theoretical curves are shown in these figures by solid lines. x 6 a Figures 1-4 show that with the adsorption interaction a7 . parameter c suitably selected, the entire set of the experimental points can be adequately described by ny f equations (1)-(3). co Figures 5 and 6 show pH and temperature dependencies 5 ‘ of c obtained for PEG macromolecules and three different kes adsorbents. These dependencies were used to determine the gg ° critical conditions (points of intersection between the curves ws and the abscissa axis). Rei De Gennes”! suggested a linear relationship between the " a c parameter and a temperature. Figure 6 shows that for the gees 4 given systems this relationship holds but approximately, mee oR Oo within a narrow range of temperatures near the critical sx point. Also found approximately linear was the relationship 2 | 9 | between c and pH value of the solution (Figure 5). T Figure 7 U =(K — Kgpc)/(1 — Kopc) versus adsorption interaction parameter T= —cR for the PEG—Butyl-Toyopearl 650M (1, 2), PEG— SOLOZA K-33 (3, 4), PEG-SOLOZA K-0 (5), PVP-SOLOZA K-33 (6), ra) and PPG-SOLOZA KG-8 (7) systems. Solid line: equation (4). (1) pH 4.6, 1.0 temperature varying from 18 to 50°C; (2) temperature 43°C, pH varying ° from 3.9 to 8.8; (3) pH 5, temperature varying from 1.5 to 32°C; (4) 2 temperature 22°C, pH varying from 4.5 to 8; (5) pH 4.5, temperature varying from 8 to 30°C; (6) temperature 22°C, pH varying from 5 to 8; (7) pH 5, temperature varying from 5 to 19.5°C 0.5 om ° Universal nature of adsorption effects in the & 1 chromatography of polymers e 0 Theory’['°][predicts][the][universal][nature][of][adsorption] 4 5 6 7 effects in the chromatography of macromolecules. By pH excluding the exclusion effects from equation (1), the following equation was obtained in Ref. 10; Os KKove~ _ V™ p14 _ yay (4) 1 — Kopc 2 Figure 5 Adsorption interaction parameter, c, versus eluent pH in the According to equation (4), the experimentally measured PEG=ButylToyopear™ 650M system at 43°@ (1), and in the PEG= quantity U =(K — Kgpc)/(1 — Kopc) must be a function of SOEOZAVK=33 system at 22°C (2) one dimensionless parameter I! = — cR. 

700 POLYMER Volume 39 Number 3 1998 

Adsorption effects in chromatography of polymers: A. A. Gorbunov et al. 

Figure 7 gives the experimental data of Figures 1-4 in the U versus T’ coordinates. The solid line in Figure 7 corresponds to the theoretical relationship (equation (4)). It 10 can be seen that the chromatographic data for all PEG, PPG, and PVP samples for four adsorbents at various tempera8 tures and pH values are described by a common relationship of the form given in equation (4). Previously!!', it was shown that the same theoretical relationship is fitted by the - 6 entire set of experimental chromatographic data*'* for the E system polystyrene—porous glass at various temperatures = 4 and mixed chloroform—carbon tetrachloride eluent compositions. Thus, the universal nature of the manifestation of adsorption effects in chromatography has been demon2 strated experimentally for polymers of various chemical nature and molecular weight, for adsorbents of various structure and with various pore sizes, and for both organic 0 10 20 30 and aqueous eluents, with the adsorption interactions varied tc) in diverse ways. Figure 8 Temperature dependence of the mean thickness of long adsorbing macromolecules, H, in the PEG~SOLOZA K-33 system at pH 5 Correlation length of adsorption and the mean thickness of adsorbed macromolecules The adsorption interaction parameter c has the dimension . . of a reciprocal length, reciprocal parameter, H = c7!, called the conformations of adsorbed PEG macromolecules with a the correlation length of adsorption. The correlation length mean thickness of about | nm, really do exist in the pores of of adsorption is a large scale characteristic which is SOLOZA adsorbent in the course of chromatographic independent either of the structural details of the polymer experiments. ; . . chain or of the microstructure of the adsorbent or of the Decreasing the temperature in the system under investinature and precise form of an adsorption interaction gation leads to a weakening of adsorption interactions, and potential. consequently, to an increase in the mean thickness of Under the conditions corresponding to the adsorption adsorbed macromolecules. The effect of increasing H with chromatography mode (at positive c values) interactions decreasing temperature can be seen in Figure 8. between a macromolecule and a surface of porous adsorbent As follows from Figure 8, in this system H reaches a are thermodynamically more beneficial than those between value of about 10 nm at 1.5°C. Even larger values of H— a macromolecule and solvent molecules, and this results in about 20 nm—were obtained for other systems (PEG— the formation of high monomer density regions near the Butyl-Toyopearl, PEG-SOLOZA K-0 and PVP-SOLOZA pore walls. The high density layer with similar properties is K-33). These values of correlation length H exceed the also known to be formed in the course of polymer mean sizes of PEG macromolecules in the solution (for adsorption on the surface of non-porous particles at low example, the radius of inertia, R, of PEG molecules of M = polymer concentrations. 4 X 10 is about 8 nm), and have the same order of According to the theories of adsorption of long ideal magnitude as the pore diameters. It is evident that in the macromolecules in pores and on a plane surface at low chromatographic experiments with rather short polymer polymer concentration (see Ref.22 for a review of these molecules these large values of H can not be identified with theories), the density of polymer chain units, y, is the any of the sizes of adsorbed molecules. But, as follows from decreasing exponential function of distance from the plane the theory”, these large values of correlation length H (or from the adsorbing wall), z: obtained in the chromatographic experiments with short PEG molecules may be considered as a prediction of the w(z) © exp( — 2cz) (5) mean thickness of long adsorbed PEG macromolecules in the same experimental system. Even in the case where H equation (5) is valid for cR > 1, i.e. for sufficiently long values exceed pore sizes we may speculate upon the macromolecules. It follows from equation (5) that the corstructure of adsorbed macromolecules: H values could be relation length, H = c7', has a meaning of the average ascribed to the mean thickness of long macromolecules thickness of a long of a long long adsorbed macromolecule, H being H being being indeadsorbing on the surface of non-porous adsorbent of the pendent of molecular molecular weight. same chemical structure. So, the chromatographic chromatographic method (essentially equilibrium It would be of interest to measure thicknesses would be of interest to measure thicknesses be of interest to measure thicknesses of interest to measure thicknesses interest to measure thicknesses to measure thicknesses measure thicknesses thicknesses of adsorbed adsorbed and thermodynamic) permits the determination of the polymer molecules,usingusing other polymer thickness polymer thickness thickness measurstructural parameter, H, i.e. the average thickness of a ing methods (Ref. “ presents a review of these these methods), long adsorbed macromolecule. and to compare compare these data with the the results, obtainable with As an example, the values of H, calculated from the use of the the proposed chromatographic chromatographic method. 

equation (5) is valid for cR > 1, i.e. for sufficiently long values exceed pore sizes we may speculate upon the macromolecules. It follows from equation (5) that the corstructure of adsorbed macromolecules: H values could be relation length, H = c7', has a meaning of the average ascribed to the mean thickness of long macromolecules thickness of a long of a long long adsorbed macromolecule, H being H being being indeadsorbing on the surface of non-porous adsorbent of the pendent of molecular molecular weight. same chemical structure. So, the chromatographic chromatographic method (essentially equilibrium It would be of interest to measure thicknesses would be of interest to measure thicknesses be of interest to measure thicknesses of interest to measure thicknesses interest to measure thicknesses to measure thicknesses measure thicknesses thicknesses of adsorbed adsorbed and thermodynamic) permits the determination of the polymer molecules,usingusing other polymer thickness polymer thickness thickness measurstructural parameter, H, i.e. the average thickness of a ing methods (Ref. “ presents a review of these these methods), long adsorbed macromolecule. and to compare compare these data with the the results, obtainable with As an example, the values of H, calculated from the use of the the proposed chromatographic chromatographic method. chromatographic measurements for the PEG-SOLOZA K- 33 system, are plotted versus temperature in Figure 8. It follows from Figure 8, that at high temperatures (15-—30°C) H values of PEG molecules adsorbed in the pores of ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS SOLOZA K-33 are about 1 nm. It can be concluded that The authors are grateful to Dr. Andrei Vakhrushev for his under these conditions the main motive of adsorbed PEG assistance in computer calculations. This research was made macromolecules is the alternation of flat adsorbed trains and possible in part by Grant No. NSYO0O from the Interloops. We suppose that at these high values of temperature national Science Foundation. 

POLYMER Volume 39 Number 3 1998 701 

## Adsorption effects in chromatography of polymers: A. A. Gorbunov et al. 

## REFERENCES 

1. Casassa, E. F., Journal of Polymer Science, Part B, 1967, 5, 773. 2. Belenkii, B. G. and Vilenchik, L. Z., Modern Liquid Chromatography of Macromolecules. Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1983. 

3. Nefyodov, P. P. and Lavrenko, P. N., Transportnyye Metody w Analiticheskoj Khimii Polimerow (Transport Methods in the Analytical Chemistry of Polymers). Khimija, Moscow, 1978. 

4. Entelis, S. G., Evreinov, V. V. and Kusayev, A. I., Reaktsionnosposobnyye Oligomery (Reactive Oligomers). Khimija, Moscow, 1985. 

5. Gorbunov, A. A., Solovyova, L. Ya, Pasechnik, V. A. and Lukyanov, A. Ye, Vysokomolekulyarnye Soedineniya, Seriya A, 1986, 28, 1859. 

6. Bakos, D., Bleha, T., Ozima, A. and Berek, D., Journal of Applied Polymer Science, 1979, 23, 2233. 

7. Campos, A., Soria, V. and Figueruelo, J. E., Makromolekulare Chemie, 1979, 180, 1961. 

8. Gorbunov, A. A. and Skvortsov, A. M., Vysokomolekulyarnye Soedineniya, Seriya A, 1986, 28, 2170; 2453. 

9. Skvortsov, A. M. and Gorbunov, A. A., Journal of Chromatography, 1986, 358, 77. 

10. Gorbunov, A. A. and Skvortsov, A. M., Doklady AN SSSR, 1987, 294, 396. 

11. Gorbunov, A. A. and Skvortsov, A. M., Vysokomolekulyarnye Soedineniya, Seriya A, 1988, 30, 3. 

12. Tennikov, M. B., Nefyodov, P. P., Lazareva, M. A. and Frenkel, S. Ya., Vysokomolekulyarnye Soedineniya, Seriya A, 1977, 19, 657. 

13. _ Belenkii, B. G., Valchikhina, M. D., Vakhtina, I. A., Gankina, E. S. and Tarakanov, O. G., Journal of Chromatography, 1976, 129, 115. 

14. Gorshkov, A. V., Much, H., Becker, H., Pasch, H., Evreinov, V. V. and Entelis, §. G., Journal of Chromatography, 1990, 523, 91. 

15. Pasch, H., Much, H., Schulz, G. and Gorshkov, A. V., LC-GC International, 1992, 5, 38. 

16. Trathnigg, B., Thamer, D., Yan, X. and Kunugasa, S., Journal of Liquid Chromatography, 1993, 16, 2439. 

17. Trathnigg,B., Thamer, D., Yan, X., Maier,B., Holzbauer, H.-R. and Much, H., Journal of Chromatography, 1994, 665, 47. 

18. Trathnigg, B., Maier, B. and Thamer, D., Journal of Liquid Chromatography, 1994, 17, 4285. 

19. Boldyrev, A. G., Dumpis, Yu. Ya., Malko, Ye. I., Fyodorova, N. M., Gorbunov, A. A., Solovyova, L. Ya., Pisarevsky, Yu. S., Vorobyov, V.P., Vinogradov, Ye. L., Pasechnik, V. A. and Morozov, S. V., in Khromatograficheskiye i Filtratsionnyye Metody Ochistki i Kontsentrirovaniya Biologicheskikh Preparatow (Chromatographic and Filtration Methods for Purifying and Concentrating Biological Preparations). Glavmikrobioprom, Moscow, 1983, p. 19. 

20. Gorbunov, A. A., Solovyova, L. Ya. and Pasechnik, V. A., Journal of Chromatography, 1988, 448, 307. 

21. De Gennes, P. G., Reports on Progress in Physics, 1969, 32, 187. 22. Gorbunov, A. A. and Skvortsov, A. M., Advances in Colloid and Interface Science, 1995, 62(1), 31. 

23. Fleer, G. J., Cohen Stuart, M. A., Scheutjens, J. M. H. M., Cosgrove, T. and Vincent, B., Polymer at Interface. Chapman, Hall, 1993. 

702 POLYMER Volume 39 Number 3 1998 

