## **Rapid #: -22893429** 

CROSS REF ID: **498611** LENDER: **INTARCHIVE (Internet Archive) :: Main Library** BORROWER: **TMA (University of Memphis, University Libraries - TMA) :: Main Library** TYPE: Article CC:CCL JOURNAL TITLE: Polymer degradation and stability USER JOURNAL TITLE: Polymer Degradation and Stability ARTICLE TITLE: Thermal decomposition of biodegradable polyesters—III. Studies on the mechanisms of thermal degradation of oligo-l-lactide using SEC, LACCC and MALDI-TOF-MS ARTICLE AUTHOR: O. Wachsen, K.H. Reichert, R.P. Krüger, H. Much, G VOLUME: 55 ISSUE: 2 MONTH: 1 YEAR: 1997 PAGES: 225-231 ISSN: 0141-3910 OCLC #: 

Processed by RapidX: 7/27/2024 1:20:36 PM 

This material may be protected by copyright law (Title 17 U.S. Code) 

## **Internet Archive Interlibrary Loan Fulfillment** 

Request on Saturday, July 27th, 2024 

Polymer Degradation and Stability 1979-1999 

0141-3910 

Thermal decomposition of biodegradable polyesters—III. Studies on the mechanisms of thermal degradation of oligo-l-lactide using SEC, LACCC and MALDI-TOF-MS 

O. Wachsen, K.H. Reichert, R.P. Krüger, H. Much, G volume 55 issue 2 year 1997, month 1 

pages 225-231 

Response from Internet Archive from: https://archive.org/details/sim_polymer-degradation-and-stability_1997-02_55_2 We hope this is helpful. 

Did we make your day? Tweet us @internetarchive 

## Please explore the Internet Archive! 

- Archive Scholar for fulltext search of over 25 million research articles 

- https://archive.org/details/inlibrary and OpenLibrary.org for books to borrow 

- Archive-it.org for library curated web collections 

- Audio, software, TV News, and the Wayback Machine as well. 

## _The Internet Archive is a non-profit library with a mission to provide Universal Access to All Knowledge._ 

NOTICE: This material may be protected by Copyright Law (Title 17, U.S. Code) 

info@archive.org 

300 Funston Avenue - San Francisco - California - 94118 - www.archive.org 

# | eee Polymer Degradation and Stability 55 (1997) 225-231 : Pa ell\. Printed in Northern© 1997Ireland.ElsevierAllSciencerights reservedLimited ELSEVIER PII: $0141-3910(96)00127-9 0141-3910/97/$17.00 Thermal decomposition of biodegradabl | —IIl. Studi h i i polyesters . Studies on the mechanisms of thermalh Iddegradationdati off oligo-L-lactideoli lacti using; SEC, LACCC and MALDI-TOF-MS 

O. Wachsen,’ K. H. Reichert,“* R. P. Kriiger,” H. Much’ & G. Schulz’ “Technical University of Berlin, Institute of Technical Chemistry, Sekr. TC 3, Str. d. 17. Juni 135, D-10623 Berlin, Germany "Institute of Applied Chemistry, Berlin-Adlershof e. V. (ACA), Rudower Chaussee 5, D-12484 Berlin, Germany (Received 25 April 1996; accepted 13 May 1996) Studies on the thermal degradation of oligo-t-lactide at 200°C under nitrogen atmosphere were carried out by combining liquid chromatographic methods (LACCC and SEC) with Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption/lonisation TimeOf-Flight Mass Spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS) and post-column derivatisation. The critical conditions of polymer adsorption in the liquid chromatography and an optimal matrix system for time-of-flight mass spectrometry have been found. The changes of molar mass distribution and chemical heterogeneity are due to simultaneous processes of degradation and recombination. The heterogeneity is caused by the formation of linear and cyclic oligomers as well as free lactic acid and oligomers with acrylic endgroups. With the exception of the lactic acid, the different functionalities already exist in the untreated oligomer. © 1997 Elsevier Science Limited. All rights reserved. 1 INTRODUCTION lar transesterfication (Fig. I(c)) with short Polvlactid« > € d )er€ De y- Ivcolid > © > molecules also causes a * decrease. . in- the mass pinea.> 7 =Ss-» “stme i2absee 7.. i ).es teay ¢ a- .¢ ¢S aaney showedaverageda thatof molarpurification“ mass. distribution.of. the polylactideThe. authorsbefore re“ be25 egiesSs ae “ieSs 32S, “vars —se ) f tea> heating‘ increased the. thermal stability by m9icCO — pe Bei, sheebiode = sciené |pegssir goote removing. :; molecules with low molar. mass and a ae | ility - egradability and their goc residual tin catalyst. An acetylation of endgroups se ga€> Pais habe>y ag7 a we€ - % d = >» S » yf y € € SS leads also to an increase. p -of7 thermal stability.'“ge peewieacess uoo , »ae= | S . ¢ wesglc =yw Furthermore,. . . hydrolysis° . (Fig. 1(d)) and= thermal. 7} hg ry aa oy eo ” i euler + pyrolytic eliminations (Fig. 1(e)) by formation of Abi—ty>> , ; vrpennpe ay ¢ . —vrz. re ese} 2V» =»—* > “beanisms¢> » : =Ss S y ¢ y/y olefinicmolar~ . mass.**endgroupsSo=) far,can allalsosuchleadmechanismsto a decreasehavein" aga aah pith . me in the range oO a ce only been postulated. Aside from the above ™ yt “ ge _ vF de - 4 2 tty se? mentioned studies, other work on the mechanef = ce po: os ¢ f ‘ aes Seen re isms of thermal degradation has been carried out a oe “4 ae ees senpenllas mae see but the employed analytical methods, e.g. oa£ ) aa)sd a >cs >ve vl elie)y ane= > be re sas y“teag ‘© thermogravimetry and direct ® pyrolysis in a mass paceyanpistes€ ackSs 25nagar y ve :wnae ¢y gra, -wil _£) Pt yrs: Pes) » af> ees< a» ; ) Piar2>» aeOor> re©*“sd. yanspectrometer,thanTherefore,the. rangeitesisworkedpossibleof . AprocessingatthathigherPy othertemperature.~'temperaturesmechanisms° « . cnain (Fig. if »)) riggs agen Cn 1 Syme take place during degradation, at processing lactones and linear polyesters. The intermolecu; : temperature. * To whom correspondence should be addressed For the characterization of chemical hetero- 

| 

226 O. Wachsen et al. n a groups may be computed. At optimized condia He|— ——oH+ Cc[ | tions4 molecule fragmentation: does not matter. =" . Further information concerning molecular struc) 0 tures can be obtained by selective post-column ms pecmdas — é ia derivatization in LACCC, for carboxylic groups z oem WE ——e: 2 by the addition of an acid/base indicator or by chromatographic comparison. (c) R'-C-O0-R?+ R°-C-O-R*g === R'-C-0-R*+aaa R°-C-O-R The intention: of this paper is‘ to study7 the mechanisms of thermal degradation of poly-.(a) en”) oH] oH, lactide by using the above mentioned chromatoHo-E von — oF + foes graphic and spectroscopic methods. Furthermore, HO}, *. 0] =m "on the time dependent decrease of molar mass at isothermal conditions is to be studied by Size (e) fooHOCHy |ri. feeCHy o-cO--H CHs Exclusion Chromatography (SEC). : spe 2 EXPERIMENTAL eee a All experiments were carried out with tempered — wfosrelonErd + profes and untempered oligo-.-lactide (Charge "7 om TL Se KTM45B, Neste Oy, Finland) as model Fig. 1. Postulated reactions of polylactide degradation: (a) substances. The oligolactide has an initial molar intramolecular transesterfication (back-biting): (b) inmass of M, = 480 g/mol and M,, = 890 g/mol. The tramolecular transesterfication: (c) intermolecular transesreasons for using an oligolactide were that it had terfication: (d) hydrolysis: (e) pyrolytic elimination. we s a higher end group content and better detectability in the MALDI-TOF-MS analysis. The geneity of polymers (e.g. different endgroups) oligomers were tempered in closed glass amLiquid Adsorption Chromatography at Critical poules in nitrogen atmosphere at 200°C for 10, Conditions (LACCC) is a very suitable analytical 20, 30, 60 and 120 min intervals. method.'*'* The ‘critical’ conditions of polymer All samples were analysed with the SEC to adsorption can be achieved by using a specific determine the molar mass distribution in relation mixture of different solvents (mobile phase), to the heating time. The SEC equipment variation of temperature or pH value of mobile consisted of a RHEOS HPLC-pump (type 4000, phase by addition of salts, etc. Enthalpic ERC, Alteglofsheim, Germany), a UV-detector differences, specifically Liquid Adsorption Chro(A =235nm, Knauer, Berlin, Germany) and 3 matography, and entropic differences, specifically PS-DVB-columns (100, 500 and 1000 A, JORDI Size Exclusion Chromatography, of the monomer Ass. Inc., Bellingham Massachusetts, U.S.A.). units between the stationary and the liquid phase Tetrahydrofuran was used as the mobile phase. compensate for each other. The hydrodynamic The evaluations of chromatograms were done volume of the polymer coil in the mixed critical with the Polymer-Standard-Service software eluent is reduced. With the ‘critical’ solvent (Mainz, Germany). The SEC was calibrated with composition (CSC) the retention time of polymer oligolactides which were characterized by species is directly related to the adsorption MALDI-TOF-MS. enthalpy of endgroups and is independent of The LACCC equipment consisted of a Jasco molar mass distribution. For identification of the Intelligent HPLC-Pump (type 880-PK, Grobspecies, separated by LACCC, MALDI-TOF-MS Umstadt, Germany), a six way sample valve and is a very suitable method.'*'’ To carry out this a Nucleosil 300-S column (250mm 4mm ID, measurement, the polymer sample has to be Macharey-Nagel, Diiren, Germany). The column mixed with a suitable matrix. After solvent was thermostated at 30°C. The ‘critical’ condievaporation, the polymer molecules were detions for poly-1-lactide were realised by a mixture sorped from the matrix by laser stimulation and of 60vol.% dioxane and 40vol.% n-hexane ionized. From the obtained spectrum the molar which was used as solvent and mobile phase. A mass distribution, the monomer mass of the Diode-Array-Detector (type UVD 3205, Gynkorepeating unit and the residual mass of the end tek, Germering, Germany) and a UV-detector 

Thermal decomposition of biodegradable polyesters—III 227 | : me Injection value | | Analytical HPLC column : 3 A os Fi § |3 | Mixing chamber z | |Reactor aa ht Detector \ Computer Leenemceed Wane ‘200 22.0 24.0 26.0 28.0 w.0 32.0 4.0 36.0 Fig. 2. Scheme of post-column reaction detection. Elution Volume / mi (type SPD-10A, Shimadzu Europa GmbH, Fig. 3. SEC elution curves: of the untempered (A) and Duisburg, Germany) were used for the identempered (B), (200°C, 1204min) oligolactide. tification of separated fractions. For the postcolumn(type 655derivatizationA-13, Merck(Fig.falas2) a reactioniauanepum (120 min): oligolactides.: : The values of the number was used. In this case the separated solvated nee (M,) and weight average (M.) molar fractions were mixed in the mixing chamber of — eqguhatrmacae of the whole curomatogram the reaction pump with o-nitrophenolate as an and for hares pecs — mn 7. - re indicator for free carboxylic endgroups. o-NitroPee Serene, Se aes ee oe eee phenolate was added as a solution (10-4 wt%) in 1. Furthermore, Table 1 includes the content of the critical mixture. The reaction between the oo bv peg apa mver ray ves indicator and the carboxylic endgroups was a, lisol: ti-oa — de oval sg visualized by consumption of the indicator and eS eee ee eee ee the decrease of the UV-signal at A = 450 nm there is a splitting into two fractions, one with a MALDI-TOF-mass spectra were recorded with higher and the eyreed wae O ewer aneat aap, a Kratos Kompact MALDI III (Shimadzu The fraction with the higher molar mass shows an Europa GmbH Duisburg, Germany) using a increase in molar mass, whereas the other nitrogen laser source (A =337nm), a_ positive paca — 2 a. a ager a polarity and 20kV acceleration voltage. The siabistehdlhas mtocccmcant Puratig ibe ol samples were dissolved in tetrahydrofurane molar mass increases with heating time, while the (1 mg/ml) and mixed with the matrix (25 mg/ml — of molecules with higher molar mass THF) before drying on the sample slide. _—— 2,4,6-Trihydroxyacetophenone was used as matrix. MALDI-TOF-MS studies were performed on 3.2 LACCC and MALDI-TOF-MS studies the tempered (120 min) and untempered oligolactide and on the separated fractions received The 3D chromatograms of the untempered and from the LACCC. tempered (120 min) oligolactides obtained from the LACCC studies by using a diode-array3 RESULTS detector are shown in Fig. 4. Both chromatograms show four fractions in the wavelength 3.1 SEC studies range of 200nm< A <356nm. In addition, there is a further red shifted peak in the fourth fraction Figure 3 shows the elution curves from the SEC of the heated oligolactide. This peak could be measurements for untempered and tempered identified as lactic acid by chromatographic 

228 

: 

| | | 

O. Wachsen et al. 

|Table 1. Molar masses and amounts (area %) of molecules lower and higher than 700g/mol|Table 1. Molar masses and amounts (area %) of molecules lower and higher than 700g/mol|Table 1. Molar masses and amounts (area %) of molecules lower and higher than 700g/mol|Table 1. Molar masses and amounts (area %) of molecules lower and higher than 700g/mol|Table 1. Molar masses and amounts (area %) of molecules lower and higher than 700g/mol|Table 1. Molar masses and amounts (area %) of molecules lower and higher than 700g/mol|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
||for heated oligolactide dependent on heating time at 7 =200°C|||||
|Heating<br>time|Fractions of molecules<br>with molar mass lower and|=Molar mass of the total<br>sample (g/mol)||Molar mass of fraction<br>with elution volumes lower||
|(min)|higher than 700g/mol|||than 30 ml|(g/mol)|
||(area %)|||||
||<700<br>>700|M,|M,|M,|M,|
|0|39.4<br>60.6|480|890|920|1100|
|10|44.6<br>55.4|330|850|1060|1350|
|20|49.6<br>50.4|320|800|1070|1380|
|30|58.3<br>41.7|300|720|1020|1370|
|60|41.6<br>58.4|410|960|1120|1520|
|120|61.5<br>38.5|270|730|1130|1590|



**==> picture [628 x 617] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
comparison. Furthermore, the second and third From the MALDI-TOF mass spectrum of the<br>peak increase with heating time while the fourth fourth fraction (shown in Fig. 6) a mass of the<br>decreases. The intensity of the first should not be repeating unit (monomer mass) could be<br>influenced by the heating time. The first peak computed to 72Da and the residual mass to<br>could also be observed when the solvent without 18 Da. Post-column derivatization with the<br>polymer was injected. This proves that the first acid/base indicator shows an intensive reaction<br>peak is a displacement peak of the critical mobile with the fourth fraction (Fig. 7). Therefore, the<br>phase. The retention times and_ intensities fourth peak can be identified as the linear<br>(compare Fig. 5) of the detected peaks at polyester of lactic acid.<br>A=235nm of the tempered and untempered The third fraction shows no reaction in the<br>oligomers are presented in Table 2. post-column derivatization (Fig. 7) and a<br>monomer mass of 72 Da and a residual mass of<br>72 Da, respectively 0 Da (shown in Fig. 8). In this<br>Absorption/ a.u.<br>and 1 : A) Absorption/ a.u : 3 =]<br>4004 |<br>8<br>0.0 10 20 30 40 5.0c 60 Retention70 80Time 9.0/ min | 0.0 =| —— a> as at ts ws “<Retentiongs Time2/ minwm<br>es<br>Absorption/ a.u. 1 . 300 — ————EEEee<br>5004 \ 4 | a | Absorption [/] [a.u] := gad,;<br>° fh 28.0 4 : |<br>| ‘ee A<br>| eS & te | R |<br>|<br>Ss ———= } te |<br>0 0.0ae10 20 30 40 $0‘a 60 Retention#«70 80Time60/ min | yy ie9 1.0 —2.0 2.0a4.0 ) 6 0Retention3 Time3 / min ; |<br>Fig. 4. LACCC 3D chromatograms of the untempered (A) Fig. §. LACCC elutions curves of the untempered (A) and<br>and tempered (B), (200°C, 120 min) oligolactide. tempered (B), (200°C, 120 min) oligolactide at A = 235 nm.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Thermal decomposition of biodegradable polyesters—III 

229 

**==> picture [628 x 853] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Tablesorption2. Retention times (¢,) and peak intensities (ab- = | Absorption/ a.u. Ph.<br>the in arbitary units) at A= 235 nm of the peaks of =<br>untempered and tempered oligolactide separated by ¥<br>ee ee LACCCEe See ee 75.04<br>Fraction Untempered Tempered _<br>(200°C, 120 min)<br>t,/min — abs./a.u. t,/min abs./a.u.<br>2 5.8 4.0 5.7 5.1 =<br>3 6.4 5.4 6.3 14.5<br>4 yi rt el 21.8 ‘; Retention Time / min<br>“oo LS a0 45 60 95 80 105 120 195 150 17.1<br>: ; ; Fig. 7. Identification of fraction 2 and 4 from LACCC by<br>case cyclic oligomers with a ring size up to 2] reaction detection at A = 450 nm.<br>monomer units could be identified.<br>The second peak was not detectable in -the : ; '<br>MALDI-TOF-MS. The reason is:  unknown at this ated oligolactideBO (F(Fig.8. 9) 9) alsoashows =the<br>; : ; , heterogeneity of the sample, but it is impossible<br>time. By chromatographic comparison with the GC ;<br>retention : er to distinguish between cyclic oligomers and<br>time of acrylic acid, the same retention<br>: oligomers with acrylic endgroups, because the<br>time as the second peak could be observed. - ra a<br>Furthermore, reaction: withP, o-nitrophenolate in; residual mass is the same in both cases.<br>the case of reaction detection can be observed<br>(see Fig. 7). This indicates the existence of linear 4 DISCUSSION<br>oligomers with acrylic endgroups.<br>The comparison with the MALDI-TOF mass By combining SEC and LACCC with MALDI-<br>spectrum of the not chromatographically separ- TOF-MS and further structure-specific methods<br>%Int.<br>100 1050.0<br>95<br>sa Peaks: 42 DPn: 18.2180<br>ws Area: 610205 DPw: 22.1067<br>- | MonomerSpreadAverage ofmass:mass:mass: 2953.83311312.459772.0420 Mn:Mw:DPz: 1312.45971592.607526.1745<br>75 Residual mass: 18.1932 Mz: 1885.6643<br>Mw/Mn: 1.2135<br>70 -<br>65<br>60 ~<br>i ie<br>50 H O<br>ve tou<br>H-O+C-C-OtH<br>40 I<br>35 CHs n<br>30 -<br>=<br>2274.6<br>26 =<br>15 4<br>20 2995.8<br>3204.1<br>0 Hl, 3 | St eve Pe<br>500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000<br>Mass/Charge<br>Fig. 6. MALDI-TOF-MS of the fourth fraction received from LACCC<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


The comparison with the MALDI-TOF mass spectrum of the not chromatographically separ- 

**==> picture [618 x 875] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
$Int.<br>aid4<br>100<br>95 - 599.1<br>30 Peaks: 16 DPn: 10.1987<br>; Area: 164776 DPw: 11.4506<br>85 Average mass: 734.4070 DPz: 12.8312<br>80 MonomerSpread ofmass:mass: 1080.097272.0102 Mw:Mn: 734.4070824.5613<br>Residual mass: 71.8672 Mz: 923.9741<br>75 Mw/Mn: 1.1228<br>70 eek 671.0<br>65<br>60<br>55<br>50 742.8 H O<br>887.0 i<br>45 0+C-C-O<br>|<br>40 - CH;<br>35 7 n<br>30<br>958.9<br>25<br>1030.7<br>20 1102.8<br>402.9<br>15 j 1175.1<br>1247.2<br>10 1391.9 1551.4<br>0 . v =|<br>400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600<br>Mass/Charge<br>Fig. 8. MALDI-TOF-MS of the third fraction received from LACCC.<br>761.0<br>100<br>90<br>Lin. n =9<br>85<br>689.0<br>80 \<br>154 |<br>70 Lin n=8 |<br>65 617.1 |<br>sa<br>554<br>& 454<br>Cyc. n=8 ,<br>W04 Cye.n=9<br>354 610.1<br>304 Acr.n=7 Act, a=8 Cyc.n=10 | Lin. K+<br>254 682.8 754.6 |<br>a 598.8 671.2 777.3<br>2¢is Lin. K+ VeeLin. K+ Acr.n =9 | || A<br>a 4 590.3 1.1 743.8 | | 799.1<br>03 tT OF T 40 =: a aed ee —t ’ A rea.<br>600 620 640 660 680 700 720 740 760 780 800<br>Mass/charge<br>Fig. 9. MALDI-TOF-MS of oligolactide (not chromatographic separated).<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


| Thermal decomposition of biodegradable polyesters—IlII 231 of detection, the changes of the molar mass chemical heterogeneity and of the molar mass | distribution and the chemical heterogeneity of distribution of each fraction can be described. oligo-L-lactide during thermal degradation at 200°C could be determined. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT | The chemical heterogeneity consists : linear = The authors thank the Deutsche Forschungsgeand _ cyclic oligomers as well as of linear meinschaft for financial support. polyesters with acrylic endgroups. It has been | observed that such molecules already exist in the untreated polymers, although only partsz of them REFERENCES change during the thermal treatment, whereby I. yromryee Hyon, S. H. & Ikada, Y., Polymer, 29 the creation of macrocyclic Structures by 2. Zhang, X., Wyss, U. P., Pichora, D. & Goosen, M. F. intramolecular transesterfication is more intenA., Polym. Bull.,27 (1992) 623. sive than the formation of acrylic derivatives by 3. Dahlmann, J. & Rafler,G., Acta Polymerica,44(1993) 103. . — : 4. Tighe, B. J., in Developments in Polymer Degradation pyrolytic ¢limination. Furthermore, hydrolytic — 5, ed. N. Grassie. Applied Science Publishers, New degradation could be assumed by way of the York, 1984, p.31. formation of free lactic acid. Simultaneously, 5. McNeill, I. C. & Leiper, H. A., Polym. Degrad. Stab., 11 during the degradation process there is a (1985) 267. at ; < ‘ , 6. McNeill, I. C. & Leiper, H. A., Polym. Degrad. Stab., 11 recombination of cyclic oligomers with linear (1985) 309. molecules by ring opening reaction, while those 7. Kricheldorf, H. R. & Liiderwald, I., Makromol. Chem., molecules with longer chain lengths are favoured. 179 (1978) 421. The preference for molecules with longer chain - ya een os i SE, Se, Si, Seo lengths is explainable by ring opening insertion of 9. Liiderwald, I., in Developments in Polymer Degradation cyclic oligomers into linear molecules, while the — 2, ed. N. Grassie. Applied Science Publishers, New molecules : : : York, 1979, p.77. ester with longer chain lengths have a higher 10. Plage, B. & Schulten, H. R., Macromolecules, 23 (1990) bond concentration with a_ higher 2642. probability for insertion reactions. Radical 11. Garozzo, D., Giuffrida) M. & Montaudo, G., degradation mechanisms by way of splittin Macromolecules, 19 (1986) 1643. 6 y y P e 12. Kopinke, F. D., Méder, M. & Wachsen, O., Polym. alcyl-oxygen or carbonyl-oxygen bonds as reDegrad. Stab., 52 (1996) 25-38. ported in Refs 5-12 were not found to occur at 13. Schulz, G., Much, H., Kriiger, H. & Wehrstedt, C., J. 200°C. Liquid Chromatography, 13 (1990) 1745. : _— For _ 14. Kriiger, R. P., Much, H. & Schulz, G., /nt. GPC Symp. molar massmodellingdistributionthe kineticsduring ofthermalchangestreatmentof the 15. Pasch,Proc. LakeH., BuenaMuch, Vista,H., Schulz, Florida,G. (5-8& JuneGorshkov,1994), p.273.A. V.. of polylactides,'* degradation and recombination LC-GC INTL, 52 (1992) 38. processes have to be taken into consideration. By 16. Kruger, R. P., G/T Fachz. Lab., 3 (1995) 189. a : combining the method of LACCC with MALDI-: 17. Paulus,Tech. Lab.,G., 42Resch,(1994)M.719.& Kriiger, R. P., Nachr. Chem. TOF-MS and/or SEC the changes of the 18. Wachsen, O., PhD Thesis, TU Berlin, 1996. 

chemical heterogeneity and of the molar mass distribution of each fraction can be described. 

