Journal of Chromatography A, 1447 (2016) 122–128 

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect ~~Journal of Chromatography A~~ jo ur nal ho me pag e: www.elsevier.com/locate/chroma 

## Separation of polyethylene glycols and amino-terminated polyethylene glycols by high-performance liquid chromatography under near critical conditions 

Y.-Z. Wei, R.-X. Zhuo, X.-L. Jiang[∗] Key Laboratory of Biomedical Polymers of Ministry of Education & Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, PR China 

|a<br> r  t<br> i c  l e <br>i  n|f|o||a<br> b<br> s<br> t  r  a<br> c  t|
|---|---|---|---|---|
|Article<br> history:||||The  separation<br> and  characterization<br> of  polyethylene<br> glycols<br> (PEGs)<br> and<br> amino-substituted<br> derivatives|
|Received<br> 3<br> February<br> 2016||||on<br> common<br> silica-based<br> reversed-phase<br> packing<br> columns<br> using<br> isocratic<br> elution<br> is  described.<br> This  sep-|
|Received<br> in<br> revised<br> form<br> 11<br> April<br> <br>Accepted<br> 13<br> April<br> 2016<br>Available<br> online<br> 14<br> April<br> 2016|||2016|aration  is achieved<br> by  liquid  chromatography<br> under<br> the  near  critical<br> conditions<br> (LCCC),  based<br> on  the<br>number<br> of  amino<br> functional<br> end<br> groups<br> without<br> obvious<br> effect<br> of  molar  mass<br> for PEGs. The mobile phase<br>is acetonitrile<br> in water<br> with  an optimal  ammonium<br> acetate<br> buffer.  The<br> separation<br> mechanism<br> of  PEG|
|Keywords:<br>Poly(ethylene<br> glycol)<br>Amino-substituted<br> PEG||||and<br> amino-substituted<br> PEG  under<br> the near  LCCC  on  silica-based<br> packing<br> columns<br> is confirmed<br> to be<br>ion-exchange<br> interaction.<br> Under<br> the  LCCC<br> of  PEG  backbone,<br> with  fine  tune  of buffer  concentration,<br> the<br>retention<br> factor<br> ratios  for benzylamine<br> and  phenol<br> in  buffered  mobile<br> phases,<br>(benzylamine/phenol)-<br>a|
|Liquid<br> chromatography<br> at<br>|critical|||values, were  used<br> to assess<br> the  ion-exchange<br> capacity<br> on  silica-based<br> reversed-phase<br> packing<br> columns.|
|conditions||||To<br> the  best  of our  knowledge,<br> this  is the  first  report  on separation<br> of amino-functional<br> PEGs independent|
|Revered-phase<br> liquid<br> chromatography||||of<br> the  molar<br> mass  by  isocratic<br> elution<br> using  common<br> C18  or phenyl<br> reversed-phase<br> packing<br> columns.|
|Ion-exchange||||© 2016  Elsevier<br> B.V.  All  rights<br> reserved.|



## **Introduction** 

## **1.** 

There has been a great interest in polyethylene glycol (PEG) and their conjugates of biologically active molecules in recent years [1–5], because PEG is one of the few polymers approved for clinical internal applications in humans by FDA (US Food and Drug Administration) [6]. The first step in preparation of functional PEGs is the chemical derivatization of end groups. Amino-substituted PEG derivatives are widely used among the various functionalized PEGs [7–9]. As the non-functionalized portion is an impurity that will not be reactive towards the target PEGylation, the fractions of non-, monoand bi-functional PEGs need to be determined for raw materials in the production of polymer conjugates for pharmaceutical applications. However, there are limited numbers of publications on separation and characterization of PEGs and functional PEGs [10]. For example, separation of modified PEG methyl ether on a cyanopropyl column was reported with a gradient elution, with low detection sensitivity and poor shapes of peaks [11]. Barman 

> ∗ Corresponding author at: Key Laboratory of Biomedical Polymers of Ministry of Education and Department of Chemistry, Wuhan University, Luojia Hill, Wuhan 430072, PR China. E-mail addresses: weiyanzhen1009@163.com (Y.-Z. Wei), bmp@whu.edu.cn (R.-X. Zhuo), xljiang@whu.edu.cn, xljiang118@hotmail.com (X.-L. Jiang). 

et al. [12] described very good reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) method for separation and quantitative determination of PEG impurities in two monofunctional PEG types, PEG methyl ether and PEG vinyl ether. Separation of PEGs and amino-substituted PEGs on a TSK-GEL G4000PWXL column was described, but molar mass effect of PEG backbone was not mentioned [13]. Tang et al. [14] demonstrated the separation and detection of bi-maleimide-PEG and mono-maleimide-PEG by RPHPLC gradient elution, although molar mass effect of PEG backbone was observed clearly. 

LCCC (liquid chromatography at critical conditions) has been proven to be especially effective in the analysis of functional polymers. In this mode, the retention volume of non-functional polymer becomes independent of molar mass, and this offers the opportunity to separate polymers with respect to their functionality [15–22]. However, the exact LCCC is not easy to obtain experimentally, and the LCCC conditions do not necessarily provide good separation of polymers with different end-groups [20]. RP-HPLC is by far the most widely used mode of HPLC, in which, stationary phases based on modified silica are most frequently used [23,24]. This kind of modification is seldom completed, the residual silanol groups may affect separation, especially in the analysis of basic compounds [25,26]. Cox and Stout had investigated the retention mechanisms of basic compounds on silica and C8 reversed-phase packing, which were shown to be mainly ion exchange mechanism 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chroma.2016.04.035 0021-9673/© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 

0021-9673/© 

Y.-Z. Wei et al. / J. Chromatogr. A 1447 (2016) 122–128 

123 

**Table 1** Structures and abbreviations of the studied PEGs (RCH2CH2O-[CH2CH2O]nCH2CH2R’). 

|CH2CH2R’).2CH2R’).CH2R’).2R’).R’).|CH2CH2R’).2CH2R’).CH2R’).2R’).R’).|CH2CH2R’).2CH2R’).CH2R’).2R’).R’).|CH2CH2R’).2CH2R’).CH2R’).2R’).R’).|||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Compound<br>R<br>R′<br>Avg.<br> molar<br> mass<br>1<br>OH<br>OH<br>5500–7000<br>~~TT~~|||||Abbreviations<br>PEG<br> 6k<br>~~<~~|
|2|NH2|NH2|6120<br> (Mw),<br> 5828<br>|(Mn)|PEGDNH2 6k|
|3|CH3O|OH|5272<br> (Mw),<br> 4677<br>|(Mn)|MPEGOH<br> 5k|
|4|CH3O|NH2|4957<br> (Mw),<br> 4812<br>|(Mn)|MPEGNH2 5k|
|5<br>6<br>7<br>8|OH<br>OH<br>NH2<br>OH|OH<br>NH2<br>NH2<br>OH|3500–4500<br>4120<br> (Mw),<br> 4079<br> <br>4312<br> (Mw),<br> 4106<br> <br>1900–2200|(Mn)<br>(Mn)|PEG<br> 4<br> K<br>PEGNH2 4k<br>PEGDNH2 4k<br>PEG<br> 2k|
|9<br>NH2<br>Mw: weight-average<br> molar<br>||NH2<br>mass,<br>|2090<br> (Mw),<br> 2029<br> (Mn)<br>PEGDNH2 2k<br>Mn: number-average<br> molar<br> mass.<br>~~ee~~|||



[24,27,28]. Euerby et al. [29] had evaluated a range of commercially available reversed-phase liquid chromatographic columns containing phenyl moieties and C18 moieties, using ion-exchange capacity (IEC) measured as the retention ratio Q A/P[,][k] benzylamine[/k] phenol[,][to] assess the active amount of ion exchange sites on silica-based surface in the specific buffered mobile phase. The greater the values of a A/P[,][the] larger amount of ion exchange sites, and the smaller the values, the less amount of ion-exchange sites [30–32]. To the best of our knowledge, no detailed studies on separation of amino-functional PEGs independent of the molar mass by isocratic LCCC using reversed-phase packing columns have been published yet. In this work, we describe a simple and suitable LC method for separation of PEGs and amino-functional PEGs independent of the molar mass by isocratic elution, taking advantage of ion exchange sites of common silica-based reversed-phase packing columns at appropriate LCCC conditions. Specially, the optimization of the buffer composition in the mobile phase will 

be investigated. 

## **2. Materials and methods** 

## 2.1. Materials 

Characteristics and abbreviations of the polymer samples used in this work are summarized in Table 1. PEG 2k, PEG 4k and PEG 6k were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent (Shanghai, China). MPEGOH 5k was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Steinheim, Germany). PEGDNH2 2k, PEGNH2 4k, PEGDNH2 4k, MPEGNH2 5k and PEGDNH2 6k were from Beijing Chemgen Pharma (Beijing, China). Ammonium acetate from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent (AR grade, Shanghai, China) was used. Acetonitrile was purchased from Tedia Company (HPLC grade, Fairfleld, USA). Water from an Arium[®] pro UF purification system (Sartorius, Goettingen, Germany) was used. All chemicals and reagents were used as received. 

## 2.2. Chromatographic separation and detection 

Analytical chromatography was performed by an HPLC system assembled with Cometro 6000 LDI pump (South Plainfield, USA), a temperature controller and a Softa (Model 300 S, Burbank, USA) evaporative light scattering detector (ELSD) on a XB-Phenyl column (250 × 4.6 mm I.D., 5 ww m particle size, 300 Å pore size, Welch Materials, Shanghai, China), a Shodex-C18 column (250 × 4.6 mm I.D., 5 uy m particle size, 100 Å pore size, Showa Denko, Tokyo, Japan), or a TSK-GEL G4000PWXL column (300 × 7.8 mm I.D., 10 pw m particle size, 500 Å pore size, Tosoh, Tokyo, Japan). PEGs and aminosubstituted PEG derivatives do not possess any structural elements absorbing in the commonly applied UV region. ELSD is especially well-suited for the determination of any nonvolatile analyte [33]. For ELSD, air was used as carrier gas, the temperatures of the drift tube and spray chamber were set at 80[◦] C and 50[◦] C, respectively. 

**Fig. 1.** The chromatograms of PEGs and amino-substituted PEG derivatives obtained on TSK-GEL G4000PWXL column (mobile phase: water with 2.5 mmol/L CH3COONH4, flow-rate 0.5 mL/min, polymer concentration in water: 2 mg/mL). 

The use of a volatile buffer salt was obligatory because of the ELSD, therefore CH3COONH4 was chosen as the buffer salt in this study. The mobile phases were prepared by first dissolving appropriate amounts of CH3COONH4 in water for the desired concentration. The aqueous phase was filtered through a 0.22 ww m HPLC filter before mixed with the organic phase and degassed prior to use by ultrasound. Samples were prepared in a 35:65 (volume ratio) mixture of acetonitrile and water at the concentration of 0.2 mg/mL (unless mentioned otherwise) and injected by a loop volume of 20 ww L. Acetone was used as a t0 marker. Data was collected using EZChrom Elite software. Data analysis was performed on a Microsoft EXCEL spreadsheet. Principal component analysis (PCA) was applied to classify the polymers according to the retention times measured for PEGs and amino-substituted PEG derivatives by MATLAB 2011a. 

## **3. Results and discussion** 

Good separation of PEGs and the amino-substituted PEG derivatives with an average molar mass of 2000 and 3350 according to the ion-exchange interaction between amino-terminated group and the column packing surface was reported [13] on a TSK-GEL G4000PWXL column, which is widely used in aqueous sizeexclusion chromatography (SEC). However, the molar mass effect of PEGs was not mentioned. Actually, the size exclusion effect for PEG backbone was clearly observed, just as shown in Fig. 1. It can be seen that sample PEG 6k with higher molar mass was eluted earlier than samples PEG 2k and PEG 4k with lower molar mass. Bi-amino PEGDNH2 6k also had a shorter retention time compared to other bi-amino-substituted PEGs (PEGDNH2 4k and PEGDNH2 2k). Thus separation methods of PEGs and amino-substituted PEG derivatives avoiding the effect of molar mass are worthy to explore. 

## Effects 

## of organic solvent composition on the retention of PEG 

## 3.1. 

Liquid chromatography at critical conditions (LCCC) has been proven to be especially effective in the analysis of functional polymers. In this mode, the retention volume of non-functional polymer becomes independent of molar mass, and this offers the opportunity to separate polymers with respect to their functionality 

tunity 

124 Y.-Z. Wei et al. / J. Chromatogr. A 1447 (2016) 122–128 

**Fig. 2.** The retention time of PEGs with different molar masses on XB-Phenyl column in various compositions of acetonitrile-water at 30[◦] C (The values indicated in the figure refer to the vol% of acetonitrile in water). 

[34,35]. To obtain the LCCC, the effect of the composition of mobile phase (volume percentage of acetonitrile in water) on the interaction between PEG chain and XB-Phenyl column packing was investigated and shown in Fig. 2. Critical composition for PEG was found at 45% acetonitrile in water at 30[◦] C. At this critical composition, nearly identical elution time for the lower molar mass PEG 2k and the higher molar mass PEG 6k was obtained, which indicates that the molar mass does not strongly influence the retention at the selected critical chromatographic condition. This could provide the opportunity to separate amino-substituted PEG derivatives according to the number of amino-functional end-groups. The LCCC for PEG on another silica-based reversed-phase packing column Shodex-C18 column was obtained with the mobile phase 40%vol acetonitrile in water at 25[◦] C. 3.2. The role of the ion exchange properties in silica-based stationary phases 

XB-Phenyl column and Shodex-C18 column are both silicabased reversed-phase packing columns. This kind of packing possesses ion exchange properties which can play a role in separation of amines via electrostatic interaction through the ion exchange sites on the surface of the packing [25]. Ion-exchange capacity (IEC) could be measured as retention factor ratio Qa A/P (kbenzylamine/kphenol). The Qa A/P[value] can reflect the active amount of ion exchange sites on silica-based surface in the specific buffered mobile phase. The greater the values of Qa A/P[,][the] larger amount of ion exchange sites, and the lower Qa A/P[—values] imply the absence of ion-exchange sites [30]. 

Different Qa A/P[values] were obtained for different CH3COONH4 concentrations in the critical mobile phases of PEGs on both silicabased columns and are summarized in Table 2. It can be seen from this Table that the Qa A/P[—values] decreased with increasing buffer CH3COONH4 contents. Stella et al. [36] had pointed out that if 

|**Table**<br>|**2**||||||||||||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|The<br> values<br>||of|Qa|A/P obtained<br>|on<br>|XB-Phenyl<br> column<br>|||and<br>|Shodex-C18<br> column.|||
|[CH3COONH4] (mmol/L)||||||a|A/P (XB-Phenyla)|||Qa|A/P (Shodex-C18b)||
|1||||||a|A/P =<br>|2.18||Qa|A/P =<br>|0.47|
|2||||||a|A/P =<br>|1.04||Qa|A/P =<br>|0.19|
|5||||||a|A/P =<br>|0.29||Qa|A/P =<br>|−0.09|
|6||||||a|A/P =<br>|0.19||–|||
|10||||||a|A/P =<br>|0.03||Qa|A/P =<br>|−0.13|



> a Mobile-phase containing 45% acetonitrile 30[◦] C. 

> b Mobile-phase containing 40% acetonitrile 25[◦] C. 

**Fig. 3.** Effect of ammonium acetate concentration in the mobile phase (45% acetonitrile in water) on retention time of PEGs on XB-phenyl column. 

the values of Qa A/P[were] larger than 0.1, then ion exchange sites on the surface of the silica-based column were active. Based on data in Table 2, if the CH3COONH4 concentration is lower than or equal to 6 mmol/L on XB-Phenyl column (2 mmol/L for Shodex-C18 column), these ion exchange sites offered electrostatic interaction with the amino functional group, which provided the opportunity to amino-substituted PEG derivatives under near LCCC. 

to separate 

## 3.3. Effects of the buffer concentration on the separation of amino-substituted PEG derivatives 

## amino-substituted PEG 

The silica-based columns used in the study can provide ion exchange interaction with amino group according to the Qa A/P[-] values. Amino-substituted PEGs were used to study the interaction between amino functional group and ion exchange sites under near LCCC of PEG. Different CH3COONH4 concentrations were used on XB-phenyl column to study the effects of salt on separation of various PEGs, when mobile phase contained 45% acetonitrile. As shown in Fig. 3, the retention times for all non-amino-substituted PEGs with different molar mass were almost same when the mobile phases containing CH3COONH4 from 1 to 10 mmol/L were used. The retention time of mono-amino-substituted MPEGNH2 5k gradually increased with the decrease of salt concentrations. The retention times of bi-amino-substituted PEGs with different molar mass also increased with reducing buffer concentrations. It is worth noting that the bi-amino-substituted PEGs had more dramatic changes in retention time than mono-amino-substituted PEGs, when the concentrations of CH3COONH4 varied in the mobile phases. According to the ion-exchange mechanism [27], a plot of retention factor (k[′] ) against the inverse of counter-ion concentration should be a straight-line graph. Such plots of k[′] against the inverse of ammonium ion concentration for mono-aminosubstituted MPEGNH2 and bi-amino-substituted PEGs are shown in Fig. 4. Indeed, all of these plots are linear, manifesting that the LC interaction mechanism is ion-exchange under the near LCCC with 45% acetonitrile in water. Bi-amino-substituted PEGs with different molar masses had higher slopes than mono-amino-substituted 

ent 

Y.-Z. Wei et al. / J. Chromatogr. A 1447 (2016) 122–128 125 

**Fig. 4.** Plot of retention factor (k[′] ) against inverse ammonium ion concentration on XB-phenyl column. 

XB-phenyl 

**Fig. 6.** Principal component analysis: distribution of PEGs and amino-substituted PEG derivatives with different ammonium acetate concentration in the mobile phase (a) acetonitrile/water (45/55, V/V) and (b) acetonitrile/water (42/58, V/V). Column: XB-Phenyl at 30[◦] C. 

**Fig. 5.** Effect of ammonium acetate concentration in the mobile phase (40% acetonitrile in water) on retention time of PEGs on Shodex-C18 column. 

MPEGNH2 5k, which indicated that bi-amino-substituted PEG had stronger ionic interaction with the column surface and longer retention time. 

The effects of different CH3COONH4 concentrations on separation of PEGs was studied with Shodex-C18 column under the near LCCC conditions for PEG, containing 40% acetonitrile in water at 25[◦] C. As shown in Fig. 5, similar separation results for amino-substituted PEG derivatives based on the number of aminofunctional end-groups were obtained. 

## 3.4. Chemometric evaluation of retention data 

Principal component analysis (PCA) is a frequently used statistical method. It can extract information from large datasets to reveal similarities and differences among the columns and test substances [37,38]. Engelhardt et al. [39] used PCA to classify the differentiation between the amines that studied. The PCA of PEGs and amino-substituted PEG derivatives was shown in Fig. 6, with the ammonium acetate concentration in the mobile phase from 0 to 10 mmol/L. It is obvious that the ammonium acetate concentration used in the mobile phase had a stronger influence on the retention times of amino-substituted PEGs than those of 

non-amino-substituted PEGs. Specially, distribution of PEGs and amino-substituted PEG derivatives under LCCC (Fig. 6a) clearly depends on the type of functional end-groups without obvious molar mass effect. In Fig. 7 a and b with ammonium acetate concentration of 2 and 5 mmol/L, respectively, the grouping of PEGs and amino-substituted PEG derivatives can be clearly seen. However, in Fig. 7 c and d with ammonium acetate concentration of 7 and 10 mmol/L, respectively, no differentiation between PEGs and amino-substituted PEG derivatives is possible, which means that PEGs and amino-substituted PEG derivatives cannot be separated according to the end groups under these chromatographic conditions. 

## Chromatograms 

## of 

## amino-substituted PEG derivatives 

The chromatograms of PEGs on XB-Phenyl column are shown in Fig. 8 as the representative adsorption mode for PEG backbone, when the mobile phase contained 42% acetonitrile in water with 2 mmol/L CH3COONH4 at 30[◦] C. It was clearly shown that PEGs were separated mainly according to the number of amino-functional end-groups. However, the molar mass effect on retention time is obviously observed. For example, PEG 2k eluted faster than PEG 6k, PEGDNH2 2k came out earlier than PEGDNH2 6k. MPEGOH 5k had the longest retention time in non-amino-substituted PEG samples investigated, probably due to the hydrophobic effect of methyl group [12]. 

To avoid the molar mass effect in separation of PEGs, the was used. The chromatograms of PEGs are shown in Fig. 9 

3.5. 

functional end-groups 

LCCC was 

**==> picture [342 x 7] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
126 Y.-Z. Wei et al. / J. Chromatogr. A 1447 (2016) 122–128<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**Fig. 7.** Principal component analysis: distribution of PEGs and amino-substituted PEG derivatives with different column temperature at 25[◦] C, 30[◦] C and 35[◦] C in the acetonitrile/water (42/58, V/V) mobile phase with (a) 2, (b) 5, (c) 7 and (d) 10 mmol/L ammonium acetate. Column: XB-Phenyl. 

acetonitrile/water (42/58, 

**Fig. 8.** The chromatograms of PEGs obtained on XB-Phenyl column (mobile phase: acetonitrile: water = 42:58 with 2 mmol/L CH3COONH4, flow-rate 0.5 mL/min). 

**Fig. 9.** The chromatograms of PEGs obtained on XB-Phenyl column (mobile phase: acetonitrile: water = 45:55 with 2 mmol/L CH3COONH4, flow-rate 0.5 mL/min). 

when mobile phase contained 45% acetonitrile in water with 2 mmol/L CH3COONH4 at 30[◦] C. It was clearly shown that PEGs were successfully separated according to the number of amino functional groups. Their molar mass had no obvious impact on retention 

time. For example, the retention times were almost same for PEG 2k, PEG 4k, MPEGOH 5k and PEG 6k, and the retention times for PEGDNH2 2k, PEGDNH2 4k and PEGDNH2 6k were also similar. But mono-amino-substituted PEGNH2 4k and MPEGNH2 5k had longer 

Y.-Z. Wei et al. / J. Chromatogr. A 1447 (2016) 122–128 127 

Jiang (Wageningen University) for her English editing of the revised version. 

## **References** 

**Fig. 10.** The chromatograms of PEGs obtained on Shodex-C18 column (mobile phase: acetonitrile: water = 40:60 with 2 mmol/L CH3COONH4, flow-rate 0.5 mL/ min). 

retention time than non-amino-substituted PEG but less retention time than bi-amino-substituted PEG, because amino functional end-group could interact with the column silanol ion exchange sites. The interaction became stronger when the number of aminogroup increased, so PEGDNH2 2k, PEGDNH2 4k and PEGDNH2 6k had the longest retention time among these PEG samples. This chromatographic condition worked well in separation of PEGs based on the number of amino functional groups independent of the molar mass on XB-phenyl column. The chromatograms of PEGs on another silica-based Shodex-C18 column are shown in Fig. 10. It can be seen that PEGs were successfully separated according to the number of amino functional group without obvious effect of molar mass. 

## **4. Conclusions** 

Critical conditions of liquid chromatography for PEGs with different molar mass on silica-based reversed-phase columns were first obtained by adjusting mobile phase composition with various percentage of organic solvent acetonitrile in water. Under these LCCC, with fine tune of buffer concentration, the retention factor ratios for benzylamine and phenol in buffered mobile phases, Qa A/P[values,] were used to assess the ion-exchange capacity on silica-based reversed-phase packing column. It was shown that the separation was mainly due to ion-exchange mechanism through ion-exchange sites on silica-based packing columns. After determination of the suitable buffer concentration (2 mmol/L CH3COONH4, volatile buffer) under the near LCCC, it was possible to separate the PEGs according to the number of amino functional end group without obvious effect of molar mass. PCA was used to classify the differentiation between the polymers that studied. The distribution of PEGs and amino-substituted PEG derivatives was observed clearly, depending on the type of functional groups under LCCC. So far as we know, this is the first report on separation of amino-functional PEGs independent of the molar mass by isocratic elution using common reversed-phase packing columns. 

## **Acknowledgements** 

This research was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21374083 and 21174109). We thank Mr. Jian Yang (State Key Laboratory of Information Engineering in Surveying, Mapping and Remote Sensing, Wuhan University) for his cooperation in principal component analysis and Miss Yibo 

[1] T.D. Brumeanu, H. Zaghouani, C. Bona, Purification of antigenized immunoglobulins derivatized with monomethoxypolyethylene glycol, J. Chromatogr. A 696 (1995) 219–225. [2] J.M. Harris, Poly(Ethylene Glycol) Chemistry: Biotechnical and Biomedical Applications, Springer Science & Business Media, 2013. [3] X.-W. Lou, J.L.J. van Dongen, E.W. Meijer, Superheated high temperature to improve size exclusion chromatography separation of polyethylene glycols with chloroform as the mobile phase, J. Chromatogr. A 1237 (2012) 72–79. [4] A. Kolate, D. Baradia, S. Patil, I. Vhora, G. Kore, A. Misra, PEG-A versatile conjugating ligand for drugs and drug delivery systems, J. Control. Release 192 (2014) 67–81. [5] D.V. Korzhavin, T.V. Chernovskaya, Y.G. Efanov, E.G. Rudenko, R.A. Ivanov, A.B. Pshenichnikova, V.I. Shvets, Preparation of monoPEGylated human interferon beta-1a: optimization of the conditions for N-terminal PEGylation, Appl. Biochem. Microbiol. 51 (2015) 774–785. [6] G. Molineux, Pegylation: engineering improved biopharmaceuticals for oncology, Pharmacotherapy 23 (2003) 3S–8S. [7] P. Huang, L. Yang, C. Wang, J. Chen, S. Wang, S. Wang, Y. Chen, D. Wang, H. Huang, Preparation and characterization of folate targeting magnetic nanomedicine loaded with gambogenic acid, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 15 (2015) 4774–4783. [8] E. Byun, H. Lee, Enhanced loading efficiency and sustained release of doxorubicin from hyaluronic acid/graphene oxide composite hydrogels by a mussel-inspired catecholamine, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 14 (2014) 7395–7401. [9] F. Liu, D. Deng, X. Chen, Z. Qian, S. Achilefu, Y. Gu, Folate-polyethylene glycol conjugated near-infrared fluorescence probe with high targeting affinity and sensitivity for in vivo early tumor diagnosis, Mol. Imaging Biol. 12 (2010) 595–607. [10] S. Abrar, B. Trathnigg, Characterization of polyoxyethylenes according to the number of hydroxy end groups by hydrophilic interaction chromatography at critical conditions for polyethylene glycol, Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 400 (2011) 2531–2537. [11] W.H. Leister, L.E. Weaner, D.G. Walker, Analysis and purification of modified methoxy (polyethylene glycol) compounds of similar molecular mass by high-performance liquid chromatography, J. Chromatogr. A 704 (1995) 369–376. [12] B.N. Barman, D.H. Champion, S.L. Sjoberg, Identification and quantification of polyethylene glycol types in polyethylene glycol methyl ether and polyethylene glycol vinyl ether, J. Chromatogr. A 1216 (2009) 6816–6823. [13] M. Liu, C. Xie, W. Xu, W. Lu, Separation of polyethylene glycols and their amino-substituted derivatives by high-performance gel filtration chromatography at low ionic strength with refractive index detection, J. Chromatogr. A 1046 (2004) 121–126. [14] L. Tang, F. Jariwala, M. Bolgar, D.K. Lloyd, Separation and detection of bis-maleimide-polyethylene glycol and mono-maleimide-polyethylene glycol by reversed-phase high pressure liquid chromatography, J. Chromatogr. A 1246 (2012) 117–122. [15] S.G. Entelis, V.V. Evreinov, A.V. Gorshkov, Functionality and molecular weight distribution of telechelic polymers, Adv. Polym. Sci. 76 (1986) 129–175. [16] H. Pasch, B. Trathnigg, Multidimensional HPLC of Polymers, Springer, Berlin, 2013. [17] T. Macko, D. Hunkeler, Liquid chromatography under critical and limiting conditions: a survey of experimental systems for synthetic polymers, Adv. Polym. Sci. 163 (2003) 62–136. [18] X. Jiang, P.J. Schoenmakers, J.L.J. van Dongen, X. Lou, V. Lima, J. Brokken-Zijp, Mass spectrometric characterization of functional poly(methyl methacrylate) in combination with critical liquid chromatography, Anal. Chem. 75 (2003) 5517–5524. [19] X. Jiang, P.J. Schoenmakers, X. Lou, V. Lima, J.L.J. van Dongen, J. Brokken-Zijp, Separation and characterization of functional poly(n-butyl acrylate) by critical liquid chromatography, J. Chromatogr. A 1055 (2004) 123–133. [20] X. Jiang, V. Lima, P.J. Schoenmakers, Robust isocratic liquid chromatographic separation of functional poly(methyl methacrylate), J. Chromatogr. A 1018 (2003) 19–27. [21] S. Banerjee, P.N. Shah, Y. Jeong, T. Chang, K. Seethamraju, R. Faust, Structural characterization of telechelic polyisobutylene diol, J. Chromatogr. A 1376 (2015) 98–104. [22] Y. Mengerink, R. Peters, S. van der Wal, H.A. Claessens, C.A. Cramers, Endgroup-based separation and quantitation of polyamide-6,6 by means of critical chromatography, J. Chromatogr. A 949 (2002) 337–349. [23] D.V. McCalley, The challenges of the analysis of basic compounds by high performance liquid chromatography: some possible approaches for improved separations, J. Chromatogr. A 1217 (2010) 858–880. [24] J. Nawrocki, The silanol group and its role in liquid chromatography, J. Chromatogr. A 779 (1997) 29–71. [25] H.A. Claessens, M.A. van Straten, C.A. Cramers, M. Jezierska, B. Buszewski, Comparative study of test methods for reversed-phase columns for high-performance liquid chromatography, J. Chromatogr. A 826 (1998) 135–156. 

for his 

128 Y.-Z. Wei et al. / J. Chromatogr. A 1447 (2016) 122–128 

[26] U.D. Neue, C.H. Phoebe, K. Tran, Y. Cheng, Z. Lu, Dependence of reversed-phase retention of ionizable analytes on pH, concentration of organic solvent and silanol activity, J. Chromatogr. A 925 (2001) 49–67. [27] G.B. Cox, R.W. Stout, Study of the retention mechanism for basic compounds on silica under pseudo-reversed-phase conditions, J. Chromatogr. A 384 (1987) 315–336. 

- [28] X. Yang, J. Dai, P.W. Carr, Analysis and critical comparison of the reversed-phase and ion-exchange contributions to retention on polybutadiene coated zirconia and octadecyl silane bonded silica phases, J. Chromatogr. A 996 (2003) 13–31. 

- [29] M.R. Euerby, P. Petersson, W. Campbell, W. Roe, Chromatographic classification and comparison of commercially available reversed-phase liquid chromatographic columns containing phenyl moieties using principal component analysis, J. Chromatogr. A 1154 (2007) 138–151. 

- [30] K. Kimate, K. Iwaguchi, S. Onishi, Chromatographic characterization of silica C18 packing materials. Correlation between a preparation method and retention behavior of stationary phase, J. Chromatogr. Sci. 27 (1989) 721–728. 

- [31] D.H. Marchand, L.R. Snyder, J.W. Dolan, Characterization and applications of reversed-phase column selectivity based on the hydrophobic-subtraction model, J. Chromatogr. A 1191 (2008) 2–20. 

- [32] E. Cruz, M.R. Euerby, C.M. Johnson, C.A. Hackett, Chromatographic classification of commercially available reverse-phase HPLC columns, Chromatographia 44 (1997) 151–161. 

Chromatographia 

[33] J.H. Arndt, T. Macko, R. Brüll, Application of the evaporative light scattering detector to analytical problems in polymer science, J. Chromatogr. A 1310 (2013) 1–14. 

- [34] H.J.A. Philipsen, Determination of chemical composition distributions in synthetic polymers, J. Chromatogr. A 1037 (2004) 329–350. 

- [35] H. Pasch, Advanced fractionation methods for the microstructure analysis of complex polymers, Polym. Adv. Technol. 26 (2015) 771–784. 

- [36] C. Stella, S. Rudaz, J.L. Veuthey, A. Tchapla, Silica and other materials as supports in liquid chromatography. Chromatographic tests and their importance for evaluating these supports. Part II, Chromatographia 53 (2001) S132–S140. 

- [37] D.V. McCalley, R.G. Brereton, High-performance liquid chromatography of basic compounds: problems: possible solutions and tests of reversed-phase columns, J. Chromatogr. A 828 (1998) 407–420. 

- [38] R.G. Brereton, D.V. McCalley, Evaluation procedures for reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatographic columns in the analysis of strongly basic compounds using principal components analysis for data assessment, Analyst 123 (1998) 1175–1185. 

[39] H. Engelhardt, C. Blay, J. Saar, Reversed phase chromatography—the mystery of surface silanols, Chromatographia 62 (2005) S19–S29. 

