Anal Bioanal Chem (2011) 400:2531–2537 DOI 10.1007/s00216-010-4448-3 

ORIGINAL PAPER 

# Characterization of polyoxyethylenes according to the number of hydroxy end groups by hydrophilic interaction chromatography at critical conditions for polyethylene glycol 

## Shazia Abrar & Bernd Trathnigg 

Received: 14 September 2010 /Revised: 15 November 2010 /Accepted: 16 November 2010 /Published online: 1 December 2010 # Springer-Verlag 2010 

Abstract Polyoxyethylenes with different functionality and architecture can be separated according to the number of terminal hydroxy groups on polar stationary phases in acetone water mobile phases containing 90–97% acetone. The best results were obtained on a HILIC column. Typical samples, which can be analyzed by this technique, are polyethylene glycols, their mono- and dialkyl ethers, macromonomers, the fatty esters of PEG, and ethoxylated glycerol. 

Keywords PEG[. ] Ethoxylate[. ] Functionality[. ] Liquid chromatography under critical conditions[. ] HILIC 

|Abbreviations||
|---|---|
|EO|Ethylene oxide|
|HILIC|Hydrophilic interaction liquid|
||chromatography|
|LAC|Liquid adsorption chromatography|
|LCCC|Liquid chromatography at critical|
||conditions|
|MALDI-TOF-MS|Matrix-assisted time-of-flight mass|
||spectroscopy|
|PEG|Polyethylene glycol|
|PEG-MA|Polyethylene glycol monomethacrylate|
|PEG-MME|Polyethylene glycol monomethyl ether|
|PPG|Polypropylene glycol|
|SEC|Size exclusion chromatography|



Published in the special issue Analytical Sciences in Austria with Guest Editors G. Allmaier, W. Buchberger, and K. Francesconi 

S. Abrar[:] B. Trathnigg (*) Institute of Chemistry, Karl-Franzens-University, Heinrichstrasse 28, Central Polymer Laboratory/Molecular Characteristics (CePol/MC), A-8010 Graz, Austria e-mail: bernd.trathnigg@uni-graz.at 

## Introduction 

Polyoxyethylenes are hydrophilic polyethers which have many applications in industrial manufacturing, medicines and personal care products [1–3]. Polyoxyethylenes with terminal hydroxy groups and a molar mass below 20,000 g/mol are typically referred to as polyethylene glycols (PEGs), samples with higher molar mass as polyethylene oxides. Polyoxyethylenes of different molar masses may have different physical properties but the same chemical properties. 

PEGs and their derivatives are synthesized by anionic polymerization of ethylene oxide with various catalysts and initiators, resulting in products with different functionality. There are also stars with varying number of arms available. 

Difunctional PEG (with two hydroxy groups) are obtained with water or a diol (e.g., di- or triethylene glycol). Monofunctional PEGs (with only one terminal hydroxy group) are synthesized using a monofunctional alcohol as initiator [4, 5]. Diethers of PEG [6] are obtained by deactivation of the growing chain by suitable coupling reactions. PEG derivatives with higher functionality can be obtained using multivalent alcohols (such as glycerol, trimethylol-propane, pentaerithrol, etc.). Other functionalities can be introduced by derivatization of the terminal hydroxy groups. 

Polyoxyethylene is also used as hydrophilic block in the synthesis of amphiphilic surfactants that have applications in the pharmaceutical, cosmetic, and food industries. Fatty alcohol ethoxylates can only be synthesized by ethoxylation of fatty alcohols, while the fatty esters of PEG derivatives can be obtained by two different routes: ethoxylation of fatty acids, fatty esters, mono, di-, and triglycerides or esterification of the hydroxy groups PEG or other ethoxylates with fatty acids. Obviously, both routes will result in 

S. Abrar, B. Trathnigg 

2532 

a mixture of the desired product (e.g., a monoester of PEG) with the unreacted starting materials and side products (fatty acids, PEG, and diesters). 

Ethoxylated glycerides are well-known safe non-ionic surfactants [7–9] that have been used in the food processing, textile applications, and leather processing, pharmaceutical, cosmetic, and as agriculture ingredients. In cosmetics, they reduce the irritation potential of some aggressive surfactants. Other widely used ethoxylates of natural sugars are sorbitol ethoxylates and its esters known as polysorbates or tweens [10, 11]. 

PEGs are also used for the synthesis of polyurethanes [12]: polymer segments derived from PEG impart flexibility to the polyurethane for their applications as elastomeric fibers. 

Another application is the synthesis of macromonomers [13–15] and crosslinkers for hydrogels: monoacrylates or methacrylates of PEG can be polymerized (or copolymerized with other monomers) to yield graft copolymers with a (meth)acrylate backbone and PEG grafts. Dimethacrylates are crosslinkers for the production of hydrogels, which can be used as solid electrolytes [16–18]. In the synthesis of soluble graft copolymers, a macromonomer must not contain dimethacrylates, as this would lead to crosslinked products. 

Obviously, a full characterization of functional PEGs is crucial for many applications. This requires the determination of their molar mass distribution (MMD) and functionality type distribution. A rather difficult task is also the quantitative determination of other functionalities in trace amounts. As has been shown previously, this can be done by combinations of different chromatographic techniques (which will be discussed later on) and matrix-assisted timeof-flight mass spectroscopy (MALDI-TOF-MS) [1, 19–24]. The latter is an excellent tool in the identification of different functionalities, it is, however, rather problematic in the quantification of trace amounts, especially such of low molar mass. 

In this paper, we have tried to find new approaches in HPLC, which would allow a separation of polyoxyethylenes with different functionalities under conditions, which also allow a reliable quantitative determination of impurities even in trace amounts. 

## Experimental 

These investigations were performed using different instrumentation: 

System A was an isocratic HPLC system Ultimate 3000, consisting of a pump ISO-3100A, column thermostat TCC3000, autosampler WPS-3000SL, an RI detector RI 101, all from Dionex (Germerink, Germany). Mobile phases were 

mixed by mass and vacuum degassed, their composition was controlled by density measurement using a DMA 60 density meter equipped with a measuring cell DMA 602 M (A. Paar, Graz, Austria). 

System B was a gradient system Ultimate 3000, consisting of a pump DGP-3600A, solvent degasser SRD-3600, column thermostat TCC-3000, autosampler WPS-3000SL, all from Dionex (Germerink, Germany), an evaporative light scattering detector PL-ELS 2100 (Polymer Laboratories/Varian, Church Stretton, Shropshire, UK). All separations were performed at a flow rate of 0.5 ml/min. The mobile phases were mixed by the gradient pump, so their compositions are given in volume per cent. 

On both systems, data acquisition and processing was performed using the software Chromeleon (Dionex, Germerink, Germany). 

The following columns were used in this study: 

- Spherisorb 5 μ Silica (Waters, Milford, MA, USA): 

- plain silica; 250 × 4.0 mm; particle diameter: 5 μm, pore size: 80 Ǻ 

- LiChrosorb Diol (Knauer, Berlin, Germany): silica- 

- based diol phase, 250;4.6 mm, particle size: 5 μm ▪ Nucleosil 100-5 OH 5 μm (Macherey-Nagel, Dueren, Germany): silica-based diol phase; 250 × 4.6 mm; particle diameter: 5 μm; pore size: 100 Ǻ 

- Discovery HS PEG (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA, USA): 

- silica-based PEG phase; 250 × 4.6 mm; particle diameter: 5 μm; pore size: 120 Ǻ 

- Synergi MAX RP (silica-based dodecyl phase; 250 × 

- 4.6 mm; particle diameter = 4 μm; nominal pore size = 80 Ǻ, surface area: 475 m[2] g[−][1] ; carbon load: 17%. from Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) at a flow rate of 0.5 ml/min. 

- Luna hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography 

- (HILIC) 5 μm column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA; 250 × 4.6 mm; particle diameter = 5 μm; pore size = 200 Ǻ, carbon load: 5.7%) 

The solvents (acetone and water, both HPLC grade) were purchased from Roth (Karlsruhe, Germany). PEGs and their mono- and dimethyl ethers were purchased from FLUKA (Buchs, Switzerland), macromonomers from Sigma-Aldrich. 

Ethoxylates of fatty acids, mono- and triglycerides were provided by the Institute of Heavy Organic Synthesis (ICSO), Kedzierzyn-Kozle (Poland). 

## Results and discussion 

Functional polymers and oligomers can be analyzed by HPLC in different modes, which are characterized by the so-called interaction parameter [25]. In size exclusion 

Characterization of polyoxyethylenes 

2533 

chromatography (SEC), separation is driven by the entropy change, and the interaction parameter is strongly negative. Polymers are separated according to their size. Large molecules, which have no access to the pores of the stationary phase, are eluted earlier, while smaller ones spend more time in the pores and are eluted later. SEC is in widespread use for the determination of the MMD of polymers [1]. No information is, however, obtained on functionality. Liquid adsorption chromatography (LAC) is typically governed by the enthalpy change, and the interaction parameter is positive. Retention increases with the number of groups, which may interact with the stationary phase. In liquid chromatography at critical conditions (LCCC) enthalpic and entropic effects compensate each other, and retention becomes independent on molar mass. 

## Liquid adsorption chromatography 

In LAC, the separation order depends on the nature of the stationary and mobile phase. In normal phase systems (where the stationary phase is more polar than the mobile phase), retention increases with the number of polar groups. If the end groups can interact with the stationary phase, their interaction parameter (the end-group parameter q [26, 27]) must also be taken into account. 

In the case of PEG derivatives, this means, that retention depends on these parameters, on the number of ethylene oxide (EO) units and the number of hydroxy groups. As is shown in Fig. 1, the individual oligomers of PEG derivatives can be resolved on a silica column in 90–95% acetone, and retention inreases in the order polyethylene glycol dimethyl ether < polyethylene glycol monomethyl ether (PEG-MME) < PEG. In reversed phase systems, retention depends on the number of EO units and alkyl end groups [26, 27]. As has been shown previously, a full 

**==> picture [238 x 144] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Spherisorb Si, 93.23 wt-% acetone<br>PEG 400<br>MME 350<br>DME 400<br>0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14<br>Elution volume (mL)<br>Detector response (a.u.)<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Fig. 1 Separation of PEGs with different end groups on Spherisorb Si in 93 wt.% acetone 

resolution of all oligomers in a mixture of PEG and PEGMME can be achieved under appropriate conditions [28]. At a special mobile phase, composition and temperature the second homologous series can be shifted in a way that all peaks elute exactly between those of the main series. This is, however, not possible for more complex samples, which contain more than two polymer homologous series. In this case, the influence of the main chain on retention has to be suppressed. 

## Liquid chromatography at critical conditions 

In a special mobile phase composition (and temperature), the polymer chain becomes “chromatographically invisible” [29–32]. This is called the critical adsorption point (CAP), where entropic and enthalpic contributions compensate each other, and the interaction parameter equals zero. At the CAP for the EO unit, all polyethylene oxide chains elute at same elution volume regardless of their length. This separation mode allows a separation according to the end groups or other blocks. 

For functional polymers and block copolymers, the interaction parameter of the other block (or the end-group parameter) determines the elution behavior. If the polymer contains another block, the interaction parameter of which is negative, the copolymer elutes in SEC mode, i.e., earlier than the homopolymer at the CAP, which allows a determination of the MMD of this block. 

If a polymer contains one end group (or block), which is adsorbed at the CAP of the repeat unit, all oligomers elute in a sharp peak (independent of molar mass) at an elution volume corresponding to that of the corresponding end group, and are separated from the non-functional oligomers, which also elute as a narrow peak at the void volume of the column [33, 34]. Under such conditions, polymer homologous series with different functionality can be separated 

**==> picture [238 x 139] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
PEG monomethacrylate<br>dimethacrylates<br>PEG MA 526 (scaled)<br>PEG DMA 550<br>PEG MA 526<br>0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45<br>Elution volume,Ve (ml)<br>Detector response (a.u.)<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Fig. 2 Separation of PEG and a PEG methacrylate on Synergi MAX RP at the CAP for EO in 32 vol.% acetone (detection: ELSD) 

S. Abrar, B. Trathnigg 

2534 

**==> picture [486 x 223] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Fig. 3 Stationary phases OH R R R R<br>modified with polar groups OH OH OH OH O O O O<br>OH<br>R R<br>SN 52.4.2<br>O O O O O O O O O<br>\/ \ CS S$ 2h §<br>O O O O O O<br>Diol phase<br>S 22 $2e<br>O O O O O O<br>\ ne Ae A Se<br>OH<br>OH<br>HO O O O Discovery HS PEG<br>O OH OH<br>roa ce eS<br>O HO O O<br>O<br>OH OH<br>Luna HILIC<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


from each other. Monofunctional molecules and A–B diblocks (with an adsorbing block A) elute at the CAP for B as narrow peaks, and so do B–A–B triblocks. 

On a reversed phase column, this can even be achieved, if the end groups are not very different from the repeat unit, as is the case with PEG and PEG-MME: under critical conditions for PEG on a reversed phase column in acetonitrile–water, acetone–water or methanol–water mobile phases both series elute as narrow peaks, which are well separated from each other [4, 19, 20]. 

A very different elution behavior is, however, observed with A–B–A triblocks (or difunctional chains) [30, 35]. The probability of the second end group (or block) to be adsorbed depends on the size of the block in between: even at the CAP for B, the retention of A–B–A triblocks is not 

independent on molar mass: it decreases with increasing length of the block B. This means, that the individual oligomers of this series are separated in SEC order, but far behind the void volume [35–37], as is illustrated by Fig. 2. 

This can be utilized for the separation of diesters, but it is a serious problem, if small amounts of diesters have to be detected, which would fall beyond the detection limit. A reliable quantification would only be possible, if they elute as a reasonably narrow peak. Evidently, the macromonomer (polyethylene glycol monomethacrylate 526) contains some dimethacrylates, but their quantitative determination will be difficult. 

Even more complicated is the situation with amphiphilic stars, such as the higher esters in polysorbates. A separation of such samples according to the number of hydrophobic 

Fig. 4 Separation of PEGs and PPGs with different molar mass on Lichrosorb Diol in 90 wt.% acetone 

Lichrosorb Diol, 90 wt-% acetone 

**==> picture [312 x 154] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
PEG 6000<br>PPG 1000<br>PEG 900<br>PPG 3000<br>PEG 600<br>PPG 4000<br>0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5  3.0 3.5<br>Elution volume (mL)<br>Detector response (a.u.)<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Characterization of polyoxyethylenes 

2535 

**==> picture [238 x 128] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Nucleosil Diol, 95.9 wt-% acetone<br>Ethoxylated glycerol, n=20<br>PEG 600<br>PEG MME 550<br>PEG DME 500<br>0 2 4 6 8 10 12<br>Elution volume (mL)<br>Detector response (a.u.)<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Fig. 5 Separation of PEG derivatives with different number of hydroxy end groups on Nucleosil OH in 95 wt.% acetone 

**==> picture [238 x 146] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Discovery HS PEG, 95.9 wt-% acetone<br>Ethoxylated glycerol, n=20<br>PEG 600<br>PEG MME 550<br>PEG DME500<br>0 2 4 6 8 10<br>Elution volume (mL)<br>Detector response (a.u.)<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Fig. 7 Separation of PEG derivatives with different number of hydroxy end groups on Discovery HS PEG in 95.9 wt.% acetone 

groups at the CAP for PEG will result in very complex chromatograms. 

Obviously, a separation of different polymer homologous series in polyoxyethylenes according to their functionality can be problematic on reversed phase columns. 

In another communication [38], we have tried to suppress the molar mass dependence of retention of the difunctionals on a reversed phase column using a gradient along the critical adsorption line, which exists in mobile phases consisting of acetone, methanol, and water [39]. 

One may, however, speculate that it might also be possible to achieve such a separation on normal phase systems. On plain silica, this does not work, as can be concluded from Fig. 1: evidently, the interaction parameter of the EO unit and the end group parameter of the hydroxy group are too similar. If a CAP for EO could be found on a silica column, the hydroxy selectivity would be by far too low. There are, however, other polar stationary phases, which could be used for such a separation: diol phases, a PEG-modified phase (Discovery HS PEG), and a phase modified with polyglycidol (Luna HILIC), the structure of which are shown schematically in Fig. 3. 

**==> picture [238 x 144] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Nucleosil Diol, 95 wt-% acetone<br>PEG 600<br>Lauric acid<br>ethoxylate, n=12<br>0 2 4 6 8 10 12<br>Elution volume (mL)<br>Detector response (a.u.)<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Fig. 6 Separation of PEG 600 and a fatty acid ethoxylate on Nucleosil OH in 95 wt.% acetone 

The purpose of the present work was to find a system, which should allow a separation of polyoxyethylenes acording to the number of hydroxy groups. 

As has already been described previously [40], a CAP for PEG could be found on a diol phase in about 80 wt.% acetone–water. Under such conditions, polypropylene glycol (PPG) eluted in SEC mode. The same behavior is also observed on diol phases in 90% acetone (Fig. 4). 

We have thus analyzed polyoxyethylenes with different functionality on such a column and found, that they were really separated according to the number of hydroxy groups (Fig. 5). 

In the separation of fatty acid ethoxylates, the same retention order was observed: the first peak corresponds to the diester, the second one to the monoester, and the third one to PEG (Fig. 6). 

This encouraged us to try also the other columns: on the Discovery column, the same elution order was observed, but with much poorer efficiency (Fig. 7). 

The best results were obtained with the Luna HILIC column (which is typically used for other purposes [41– 44]): as can be seen in Fig. 8, polyoxyethylenes with 

**==> picture [238 x 129] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Ethoxylated glycerol,<br>n=20<br>PEG 1000<br>PEG MME 1100<br>PEG DME 1000<br>0 2 4 6 8 10 12<br>Elution time (min)<br>Detector response (a.u.)<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Fig. 8 Separation of PEG derivatives with different number of hydroxy end groups on Luna HILIC in 97 wt.% acetone 

S. Abrar, B. Trathnigg 

2536 

**==> picture [238 x 136] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
PEG 600<br>Lauric acid<br>ethoxylate, n=12<br>0 2 4 6 8 10 12<br>Elution time (min)<br>Detector response (a.u.)<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Fig. 9 Separation of PEG 600 and a fatty acid ethoxylate on Luna HILIC in 97 wt.% acetone 

different number of hydroxy groups could be very well separated from each other. 

A baseline separation of all peaks was also achieved on this column with fatty ester ethoxylates (Fig. 9). In another communication, we have applied this concept to a more complex kind of surfactants: polysorbates could be separated by two-dimensional comprehensive liquid chromatography with hydrophilic interaction chromatography and LCCC on a reversed phase column as first and second dimension [45]. The individual fractions could be identified by MALDI-TOF-MS (Abrar et al. in preparation). 

The question was now, whether these conditions really corresponded to the CAP for PEG. This is indeed the case, as can be seen in Fig. 10. The slight deviation from critical behavior in 97% acetone is no problem for samples with similar molar mass. On the other hand, the shift in retention between the different series is largest in this mobile phase. 

Under the same conditions, other polyethers (PPG and poly(tetrahydrofuran)) eluted in SEC mode (Fig. 10). The lines obtained with these polymers coincide. 

**==> picture [238 x 185] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
HILIC, 97 vol-% acetone<br>2000<br>1800<br>1600 PPG<br>1400 PTHF<br>1200<br>PEG<br>1000<br>800 PEG-MME<br>600<br>PEG-DME<br>400<br>200<br>0<br>0 1 2 3 4 5<br>Elution volume, Ve (ml)<br>Molar mass, M<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Fig. 10 Elution volumes of different polymers on Luna HILIC in 97 wt.% acetone 

**==> picture [238 x 140] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
PEG MA 360<br>PEG MA 526<br>PEG DMA 550<br>PEG 600<br>PEG 300<br>0 2 4 6 8 10 12<br>Elution time (min)<br>Detector response (a.u.)<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Fig. 11 Separation of PEGs and PEG methacrylates on Luna HILIC in 97 wt.% acetone 

A quite interesting result could be obtained in the analysis of macromonomers: as can be seen in Fig. 11, both macromonomers contain PEG (which is not dramatic), but also considerable amounts of dimethacrylates, which will lead to crosslinking in the polymerization, and thus to the formation of hydrogels instead of soluble graft copolymers. The determination of small amounts of dimethacrylates in macromonomers is the subject of another communication [38]. 

Another application is the analysis of ethoxylated glycerides: as can be seen in Fig. 12, an ethoxylated monoglyceride contained considerable amounts of ethoxylated diglyceride and glycerol as well as traces of PEG (resulting from chain transfer to water), while a sample of ethoxylated rapeseed oil did not contain these side products. 

## Conclusions 

The results described above suggest a somewhat different mechanism compared to the typical one in LCCC: if the separation would be based on adsorption, difunctionals should be resolved as predicted by the theory [30, 35]. 

**==> picture [238 x 129] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
PEG 600<br>Ethoxylated<br>rapeseed oil, n=21<br>Ethoxylated<br>monoglyceride, n=30<br>0 2 4 6 8 10 12<br>Elution time (min)<br>Detector response (a.u.)<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Fig. 12 Separation of PEG 600 and two ethoxylates on Luna HILIC in 97 wt.% acetone 

Characterization of polyoxyethylenes 

2537 

Evidently, the chromatograms obtained in this study do not show this behavior, which leads to the assumption, that the separation on these columns should rather be based on partitioning into the aqueous (or at least water-rich) layer at the surface of the stationary phase. Further studies shall show the thermodynamic background of these separations. 

Acknowledgment S.A. thanks the Higher Education Commission of Pakistan for a Ph.D. scholarship. 

19. Barman BN, Champion DH, Sjoberg SL (2009) J Chromatogr A 1216:6816 

20. Ahmed H, Trathnigg B (2010) J Sep Sci 33:1448 

21. Trathnigg, B, and Abrar, S (2010) Procedia Chemistry, The 5th International Conference on liquid separations and related techniques (5th NoSSS, Tallinn) 2:130 

22. Ahmed H, Trathnigg B (2009) J Sep Sci 32:1390 

23. Malik MI, Trathnigg B, Bartl K et al (2010) Anal Chim Acta 658:217 

24. Ahmed H, Trathnigg B, Kappe CO et al (2010) Eur Polym J 46:494 

25. Gorbunov AA, Ya Solovyova L, Skvortsov AM (1998) Polymer 39:697 

## References 

   26. Trathnigg B, Malik MI, Cuong NV et al (2008) J Chromatogr A 1207:122 

   27. Nguyen Viet C, Trathnigg B (2010) J Sep Sci 33:1052 

1. Zhang C, Liao LQ, Gong SQ (2007) Macromol Rapid Commun 28:422 

2. Signori F, Chiellini F, Solaro R (2005) Polymer 46:9642 

3. Adams ML, Lavasanifar A, Kwon GS (2003) J Pharm Sci 92:1343 

4. Kazanskii KS, Lapienis G, Kuznetsova VI et al (2000) Polym Sci A 42:585 

5. Zhang J, Zhao Y-J, Su Z-G et al (2007) J Appl Polym Sci 105:3782 

6. Schoenhammer, K, Petersen, H, Guethlein, F, et al. (2009) in Pharmaceutical Research, Vol. 26, pp. 2568, Springer Netherlands 

7. Cox MF, Weerasooriya U (2000) J Surfactants Deterg 3:213 

8. Weerasooriya U (1999) J Surfactants Deterg 2:373 

9. Fishman P, Bar-Yehuda S, Cohen S et al (2009) pp. 25 pp., CanFite Biopharma Ltd 

10. Bam NB, Cleland JL, Yang J et al (1998) J Pharm Sci 87:1554 

11. Kerwin BA (2008) J Pharm Sci 97:2924 

12. Lan PN, Corneillie S, Schacht E et al (1996) Biomaterials 17:2273 

13. Liu J, Teo WK, Chew CH et al (2000) J Appl Polym Sci 77:2785 

14. Kim SY, Lee K, Jung H et al (2005) Polymer 46:7974 

15. Srividhya M, Preethi S, Gnanamani A et al (2006) Int J Pharm 326:119 

16. Ikeda Y, Masui H, Syoji S et al (1997) Polym Int 43:269 

17. Ikeda Y, Wada Y, Matoba Y et al (2000) Electrochim Acta 45:1167 

18. Ikeda Y (2000) J Appl Polym Sci 78:1530 

28. Trathnigg, B, and Ahmed, H (2010) Anal Bioanal Chem, doi: 10.1007/s00216-010-3951-x 

29. Skvortsov AM, Gorbunov AA (1990) J Chromatogr 507:487 

30. Gorbunov AA, Trathnigg B (2002) J Chromatogr A 955:9 

31. Gorshkov AV, Evreinov VV, Entelis SG (1983) Zh Fiz Khim 57:2665 

32. Gorshkov AV, Much H, Becker H et al (1990) J Chromatogr A 523:91 

33. Skvortsov AM, Gorbunov AA (1980) Vysokomol Soedin A 22:2641 

34. Gorbunov AA, Vakhrushev AV (2004) Polymer 45:7303 

35. Rappel C, Trathnigg B, Gorbunov A (2003) J Chromatogr A 984:29 

36. Trathnigg B, Rappel C, Raml R et al (2002) J Chromatogr A 953:89 

37. Trathnigg B, Rappel C, Hödl R et al (2003) Tenside Surfactants Deterg 40:148 

38. Abrar, S, and Trathnigg, B (2010) Anal Bioanal Chem, in press 

39. Trathnigg B, Malik MI, Pircher N et al (2010) J Sep Sci 33:2052 

40. Trathnigg B (2005) Polymer 46:9211 

41. Liu X, Pohl C (2008) J Chromatogr A 1191:83 

42. Ikegami T, Tomomatsu K, Takubo H et al (2008) J Chromatogr A 1184:474 

43. Jandera P (2008) J Sep Sci 31:1421 

44. Kalili KM, de Villiers A (2009) J Chromatogr A 1216:6274 

45. Abrar, S, and Trathnigg, B (2010) J Chromatogr A, in press 

