Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics ge ———————>—$$$ ~~>.~~ ~ 

**Full  Paper** 

## **Copolymer Composition Determined by LCMALDI-TOF MS Coupling and “MassChrom2D” Data Analysis** 

## Steffen M.  Weidner , *  Jana  Falkenhagen ,  Ingo  Bressler 

The MALDI-TOF MS analysis of copolymers very often results in complex spectra. A chromatographic separation/fractionation prior to the MALDI investigation can be advantageous since the MALDI mass spectra of fractions very often reveal well-resolved peaks of distinguishable copolymer series. For this purpose, different modes of chromatography have been applied. Chromatographic runs were transferred to MALDI targets utilizing a combined air/electrospray deposition device. Using the new MassChrom2D software, fraction-dependent 2D copolymer compositions plots were obtained providing additional information on the chrojo _ matographic mode, and enabling fast modifi cation of conditions to increase separation. 

## **1. Introduction** 

Polymers are typically heterogeneous with regard to molecular mass and mass distribution. Various chromatographic separation modes are known and have been increasingly applied. Size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) can be used for separation and, after calibration with suitable standards of identical structure, for mass determination. Apart from SEC, two other modes could contribute to copolymer separation as well. These are the liquid adsorption chromatography (LAC, also known as interaction chromatography IC) and the liquid chromatography at the so-called critical point of adsorption (LCCC). The principle of LCCC separation was introduced fi rst by Entelis and co-workers.[[][1–3][]] As 

Dr. S. M. Weidner, Dr. J. Falkenhagen, I. Bressler 

BAM–Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing, 1.3 Structure Analysis, Richard-Willstaetter-Strasse 11, 12389 Berlin, Germany 

- E-mail:  steffen.weidner@bam.de 

expressed in the entited methods, these two chromatographic modes utilize (to a greater or lesser extent) adsorption effects for polymer separation. In contrast to SEC, where any adsorption interaction is ideally excluded and macromolecules are separated according to their hydrodynamic radii, interaction chromatography utilizes the interaction ability of either end groups and/or chain structure with a stationary phase. According to the chosen separation principle, this could be done in normal or reverse phase mode (NP/RP). Thus, a separation according to end groups or other chemical heterogeneities (e.g., copolymer composition,[[][4][]] tacticity,[[][5][]] etc.) can be achieved. A comprehensive overview about these particular techniques providing a number of examples can be obtained from Pasch and Thrathnigg.[[][6][]] 

However, the situation is even more complex for copolymers. Copolymers consist of least two different structural units, each with its own mass distribution. Since copolymer standards are not available, a reliable calibration of the SEC cannot be achieved. Therefore, the coupling of SEC with other chromatographic methods 

_Macromol. Chem.  Phys._ **2012** , _213_ ,  2404−2411 

**2404** © 2012  WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &  Co.  KGaA, Weinheim 

DOI: 10.1002/macp.201200169 

**wileyonlinelibrary.com** 

Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics 

Copolymer Composition Determined by LC-MALDI-TOF MS .  .  . 

www.mcp-journal.de 

(B) Van Rooij et al.[[][24][]] demonstrated the HO-[PEO], -[PPO],,-H suitability of a MALDI-FTICR mass spec——HO-{PEO],-[PPO],,-H trometer for resolving overlaid isotope patterns in combination with software that was able to calculate PEO–PPO copolymer compositions from these data. However, these instruments are routinely not available and expensive. Homemade software was also used by Tortajada and co-workers.[[][25][]] How2166 2168 ever, these authors used dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) and trihydroxyanthracene (dithranole) as matrix and found spectra especially differing in the low-mass region, depending on the matrix, the chosen salt, and the number of laser shots. Moreover, a second series representing a by-product was found, which was obviously formed by a laser-induced reaction. That is clearly understandable since dithranole, and even more DHB, require much higher laser energies than DCTB. 

_Figure  1 ._ (A) Overlapping isotope pattern (two calculated patterns for three different copolymer compositions compared to experimental data, (B) Calculated isotope pattern for two different copolymer compositions. 

and/or detectors, which are able to specifi cally determine the mass distribution of one copolymer component, is indispensable for a comprehensive analysis. Various examples have been reported, describing the coupling of SEC with nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy.[[][7–15][]] Other authors utilized the coupling of two chromatographic modes in a so-called two-dimensional approach.[[][4][,][16–23][]] This involves the separation according to end groups in a fi rst dimension, followed by the determination of molecular masses by SEC in the second dimension. 

Yet another diffi culty in determining a copolymer composition could arise from their topology. As shown in a recent paper, the individual structural units of an [A-B] _x_ -[A-C] _y_ copolyester could be arranged in a different way.[[][26][]] As a result, three different polymer chains having absolutely identical masses, but different end groups, are formed. These structures are not distinguishable by mass spectrometry. Previous chromatographic separation in those cases is therefore highly desirable. 

Since its introduction matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) and electrospray ionization (ESI) mass spectrometry (MS) have been increasingly used for polymer and copolymer analysis. However, the MALDI-TOF MS analysis of a copolymer without its previous chromatographic separation results in complex MS spectra characterized by many copolymer series overlaying each other. Even worse, in some cases, the isotope patterns of different copolymer series overlap, making a clear attribution of peaks to a distinct composition impossible. A typical example for this is represented by the class of widely used polyethylene oxide (PEO)–polypropylene oxide (PPO) copolymers. The repetition of masses of its structural units (PEO  = 44.026 Da and PPO  = 58.042 Da) results in isotope patterns that are composed of several overlapping series. As exemplarily shown in Figure  1 a, the replacement of three PPO units (174 Da) by four PEO units (172 Da) leads to a pattern that consist of least three different series. Moreover, since the mass resolution of MALDI-TOF instruments is generally lower than those of, for example, ESI-QTOF spectrometers, even a well-resolved peak in the higher mass region of the MALDI spectrum could not easily be attributed to a certain PEO/PPO composition. As shown in Figure  1 b, a rounded mass _m_ / _z_ 2161.5 can represent two different copolymers having completely different compositions. 

Since MALDI-TOF MS requires the embedding of samples in a suitable matrix necessary for the ionization/desorption process, its coupling with chromatographic systems still represents a challenge. The use of off-line coupling devices has been reported by several groups. These devices utilize the nebulization of the solvent by applying sheath gases at elevated temperatures[[][16][,][27][,][28][]] and sample spotting.[[][29][,][30][]] Another principle that has been applied is electro-spray deposition (ESD).[[][31–37][]] Although the volume of sample solution that can be vaporized by ESD is limited to ca. 50  μ L, the obtained sample spots are extremely homogeneous, and the deposited amount of sample is still suffi cient for MALDI. Thus, any effects resulting from an insuffi cient mixing of matrix, salt, and analyte were avoided. Using these off-line spray techniques, complete chromatographic runs could be transferred simply be moving the MALDI target underneath the spray device. MALDI spectra can be recorded from those target positions, which can be attributed to retention times. 

The calculation of copolymer compositions was done using a new version of MassChrom2D program. In contrast to its fi rst application for copolymers reported in 2007, a complete revision of the software was done.[[][38][]] A new peak detection algorithm combined with new 

_Macromol. Chem.  Phys._ **2012** , _213_ ,  2404−2411 © 2012  WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &  Co.  KGaA, Weinheim 

**2405** 

www.MaterialsViews.com 

Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics 

S.  M.  Weidner et al. 

www.mcp-journal.de 

_Figure  2 ._ Scheme of measurement procedure using MassChrom2D to combine chromatography and MALDI data for determining the copolymer composition. 

features to disentangle isotope patterns was implemented. Moreover, data handling and export have been completely reworked. MALDI mass spectra recorded at different positions could be easily attributed to their positions in the chromatograms. Combined with ESD of samples on the MALDI targets, a new dimension in copolymer spectra resolution can be obtained. For this work, a PEO- _b_ -PPO- _b_ -PEO copolymer has been exemplary chosen. These materials serve as low foaming emulsifi ers in the polymerization of acrylic, styrene–acrylic, and vinyl acetate latexes, and have been widely used as low foaming nonionic surfactants, revealing excellent surface activity. Many of them are biodegradable and, therefore, environmentally friendly. 

## **2. Experimental Section** 

## **2.1. Materials** 

The PEO- _b_ -PPO- _b_ -PEO block copolymer samples were obtained from Clariant (Sulzbach, Germany). 

in positive Refl ector mode to achieve a high spectral resolution. _Trans_ -2-[3-(4- _tert_ -Butylphenyl)-2-methyl-2-propenylidene] malononitrile (DCTB, 10 mg mL[−][ 1] in THF) was used as a matrix. Additionally, sodium trifl uoroacetate (NaTFA, 2 mg mL[−][ 1] in THF) was added for a selective ionization (matrix/salt, 10/1, v/v). 

## **2.4. Electrospray Transfer Device** 

A homebuilt interface, consisting of a Tefl on x-y table, which was adapted to the size of conventional 384 MALDI target plates, was used. A small contact enabled a contacting of the target plate to ground potential. The spray capillary (stainless steel, 0.1 mm inner diameter) was fi xed in a Tefl on block. The distance between target plate and capillary could be varied from 0.5 to 3 cm. High voltage (3–5 kV) was generated by a DC power supplier (FuG Elektronik GmbH, Rosenheim, Germany) and applied to the capillary. Additionally, heated gas could be applied through a series of concentric holes around the capillary to enable a better evaporation of solvents. The original solvent fl ow rate of 0.5 mL min[−][ 1] was split to approximately 20  μ L min[−][ 1] by an adjustable fl ow splitter ASI-QuickSplit (Analytic Scientifi c Instruments, Richmond, CA). The matrix/salt solution (10  μ L min[−][ 1] ) was added via a t-piece to the eluent line using a micro syringe pump (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA). 

## **2.2. Liquid Adsorption Chromatography** 

## **2.5. Software** 

Chromatographic experiments were carried out using a HP 1090 series HPLC system (Hewlett Packard, CA, USA) coupled to an evaporative light scattering detector (ELSD, Sedex 45, Sedere, France). A YMC RP18 column with 120 Å pore size (5  μ m, 250  × 4.6 mm i.D.) was used. The system temperature was 45  ° C. The eluent fl ow was 0.5 mL min[−][ 1] , and the injection volume was 20  μ L. For coupling experiments, the sample concentration was 9–10 mg mL[−][ 1] , dissolved in a mixture of 75/25 (v/v) tetrahydrofuran (THF)/water (Roth, Germany). The critical conditions of adsorption for polypropylene oxide using a solvent system of THF/water were found at a ratio of 85/15 (v/v).[[][38][]] 

## **2.3. MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometry** 

An Autofl ex III (Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer was used for the investigation. The instrument is equipped with a Smartbeam laser operating at 356 nm. Typically, 2000 laser shots were accumulated from each position. The instrument was calibrated with a series of PEG standards (Polymer Standards Service, Mainz, Germany). Spectra were recorded 

A newly developed MassChrom2D software was used to combine chromatographic and mass spectrometric data and for calculating fraction-dependent copolymer compositions. The principal workfl ow is shown in Figure  2 . 

## **3. Results and Discussion** 

In Figure  3 , the original MALDI spectra of copolymers I to IV are presented prior to fractionation. These samples reveal average molar masses between _m_ / _z_ 1500–4500. Sample I additionally shows a second peak distribution with distances of _m_ / _z_ 58 that corresponds to a PPG homopolymer possibly formed as a side product in the polymerization process. The insets of Figure  3 show the copolymer isotope patterns at masses around _m_ / _z_ 2740. They obviously consist of several individual isotope distributions overlaying each other. An attribution of such mass peaks to distinct copolymer compositions cannot be done. 

_Macromol. Chem.  Phys._ **2012** , _213_ ,  2404−2411 © 2012  WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &  Co.  KGaA, Weinheim 

**2406** 

www.MaterialsViews.com 

Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics 

Copolymer Composition Determined by LC-MALDI-TOF MS .  .  . 

www.mcp-journal.de 

change of the THF/water ratio from 85/15 to 70/30 (v/v) resulted in much broader chromatograms. The resolution of the corresponding MALDI mass spectra of fractions was thereby expected to be much higher. These curves also confi rm our assumption about the PEO/PPO ratio, since the observed stronger adsorption of sample I (broader peak) is caused by its higher PPO amount in the copolymer. 

For the off-line fractionation experi2730 2735 2740 2745 ments, two samples have been exemplarily chosen: sample I – because of its amount of PPO homopolymer, and 5000 sample IV – because this copolymer obviously contains a comparatively larger number of PEO units. Since the number of recorded MALDI spectra (34) after fractionation of sample I was too large to be shown completely, only a representative number of spectra are presented in Figure  5 . As revealed by these fi gures, two different chromatographic modes are observed. In the fi rst region of the chromatogram, the copolymers eluted. MALDI mass spectra having comparatively low peak resolution were obtained from fraction 2 to 8. The average molar mass maximum of these distributions slightly decreased from m/z 2300 to 2000. This indicates a predominantly SEC-like behavior caused by the PEO units. Starting from fraction 8, in addition to copolymer distributions, well-resolved signals with peak to peak differences of 58 Da appeared. However, their molar mass maximum increased from m/z 1500 (fraction 17) to _m_ / _z_ 2400 (fraction 33). These peaks series also represent copolymers having comparatively low PEO amounts. Finally, in fractions 31 and 33, pure PPO homopolymer was found. The small number of peaks in these fractions indicates the presence of only a few homologous species, and, therefore, demonstrates the power of the chosen 8) separation mode. 

_Figure  3 ._ Original MALDI spectra of copolymers (I to IV) prior fractionation, insets show the copolymer isotope peak pattern in the region _m_ / _z_ 2725–2745. 

In Figure  4 A, the LCCC of the investigated block copolymers (I-IV) at the critical point of adsorption of PPO (dashed line at 5.2 min retention time) is shown. At these conditions, PEO units elute according to its length in SEC mode. The peak maxima can be used for a rough estimation of the size of the PEO blocks. Moreover, peaks of samples II–IV exhibit a small shoulder at retention times close to the critical point. In contrast to that, sample I elutes near the critical point and reveals, close to the peak maximum, a shoulder at lower retention times. This is in accordance with the MALDI data that indicate a considerable amount of PPO side products in sample I. 

In order to increase the number of fractions that could be transferred onto the MALDI target using the transfer device, the chromatographic separation para meters were shifted away from pure critical separation towards increasing PPO adsorption. As shown in Figure  4 B, the 

In contrast to this behavior, MALDI spectra of fractions of copolymer IV, depicted in Figure  6 , do not clearly show the presence of PPO homopolymers. The decrease of the average molar mass maxima of these signals from _m_ / _z_ 3500 (fraction 2) to m/z 2000 (fraction 24) clearly indicates a SEC-like elution behavior. As seen from Figure  7 A, the spectrum of one of the last fractions (no. 26 of 27) is characterized by well-resolved peak series that could be 

_Figure  4 ._ LAC of PEO- _b_ -PPO- _b_ -PEO block copolymers (I-IV) using a THF/water system (A) 85/15 (v/v) and (B) 70/30 (v/v), dashed line in (A) indicates the retention time where all PPO homopolymers with identical end groups elute at “critical” conditions of adsorption for PPO. 

_Macromol. Chem.  Phys._ **2012** , _213_ ,  2404−2411 © 2012  WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &  Co.  KGaA, Weinheim 

**2407** 

www.MaterialsViews.com 

Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics 

S.  M.  Weidner et al. 

www.mcp-journal.de 

However, these fi gures also demonstrate how time consuming and comae plex the determination of a copolymer composition could be. Especially in the fi rst fractions, where the peak resolu11 tion is comparatively low, a manual evaluation with regard to copolymer 17 composition is quite impossible. For this particular reason, software has been developed that is able to handle the large amount of data obtained by 23 an excellent chromatographic separation. Figure  8 shows the surface of the new MassChrom2D software. It basi29 cally consists of three main parts. In the upper left part, the input mask is 33 seen. Here, molar masses of copolymer 3000 3500 units, salt, and end groups are inserted, fi lter options can be determined, and -PPO- _b_ -PEO block ASCII data fi les of mass spectra series and the corresponding chromatogram can be imported. In the upper right part is a plot showing the 2D copolymer composition. Below is the mass spectrum window. Red circles indicate those peaks that were taken for the calculation of the copolymer composition. Using fi lters (e.g., local maximum, local SNR) peak picking parameters can be adjusted. Baseline subtraction will be performed automatically or, if a fl at baseline was not obtained, manually by defi ning control points. If more than one mass spectrum has been imported, this window offers the opportunity to switch between mass spectrum and chromatogram. After importing the chromatogram data fi le, fraction regions are automatically added, with numbers corresponding to the number of the imported mass spectra. By means of the cursor, start and end of fractionation could be "1 determined within the chromatogram. Since MALDI intensities are not 17 quantitative, their original intensity is normalized and combined with the intensity taken from chromatographic fractions. This approach enables a 24 semi-quantifi cation of MALDI data. In the 2D composition window, the composition of the copolymer of the corresponding fraction (highlighted in 27 3500 4000 4500 the chromatogram window) is shown. These data could be easily exported -PPO- _b_ -PEO block (e.g., csv fi le format) and could be postprocessed in any suitable data calculation program (Excel, Origin, etc.). 

_Figure  5 ._ MALDI-TOF mass spectra of selected fractions of PEO- _b_ -PPO- _b_ -PEO block copolymer (I), recorded after electrospray deposition of a chromatographic run (with co-deposition of DCTB matrix). 

attributed to copolymers consisting of very high numbers of PPO units, but very low numbers of PEO units, and a very short series of PPO homopolymer. In Figure  7 B, a small region of the mass spectrum taken from fraction 17 (see Figure  6 ) is shown. Again several PEO–PPO series were found. These series consist of copolymers with a higher PEO amount. These results confirmed our initial assumption of the elution behavior deduced from chromatographic data (see Figure  4 ). 

_Figure  6 ._ MALDI–TOF mass spectra of selected fractions of PEO- _b_ -PPO- _b_ -PEO block copolymer (IV), recorded after electrospray deposition of a chromatographic run (with co-deposition of DCTB matrix). 

ViewS 

_Macromol. Chem.  Phys._ **2012** , _213_ ,  2404−2411 © 2012  WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &  Co.  KGaA, Weinheim 

**2408** 

www.MaterialsViews.com 

Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics www.mcp-journal.de 

Copolymer Composition Determined by LC-MALDI-TOF MS .  .  . 

( B ) different mechanisms. As long as the macromolecules consist of PEO–PPO 8/35 784ee = copolymers, a typical SEC-like elution (decreasing molar masses with \* . increasing retention time) is found. This s ° SEC effect is caused by a fast drop of the . PEO number whereas the number of PPO units remains nearly constant. However, 2400 2500 when the number of PEO units falls below fi ve, this SEC effect is overlaid by additional adsorption effects caused by the PPO units. Finally, a typical separation based on an absorption mechanism (increasing retention with increasing molar masses) was observed for PPO homopolymers. 

_Figure  7 ._ Detailed view of MALDI–TOF mass spectra of fraction 26 (A) and 17 (B) of PEO- _b_ -PPO- _b_ -PEO block copolymer (IV), recorded after electrospray deposition of a chromatographic run (with co-deposition of DCTB matrix). 

The investigation started with the original copolymer I (without fractionation). Its 2D composition plot is shown Figure  9 A. A large spot between 24 to 37 PPO units and 4 to15 PEO units is seen. In addition, a small line at zero PEO was found indicating the PPO homopolymer having PPO numbers between 24 and 36. For a fast determination, these results might be suffi cient, and could be therefore used as a fi ngerprint method giving a rough impression of the copolymer composition. However, this fi ngerprint of course is not suited to give any information on the chromatographic separation behavior. 

The 2D composition plot, which was constructed by adding the 2D plots of all 34 fractions, is shown in Figure  9 B. In contrast to the normalized plots shown in Figure  10 , this plot utilized the intensity values delivered by the concentration detector in chromatography for every single fraction (an example for only nine fractions is shown in Figure  8 – right). This information is much more reliable than any intensity value obtained by MALDI. A comparison of the both plots in Figure  9 clearly reveals some similarities, for example, the position of the copolymer spot and the existence of PPO homopolymers. However, the composed plot (Figure  9 B) reveals a much higher resolution and more uniform spots showing only one maximum. 

Therefore, next the individual composition of those fractions, whose mass spectra were shown in Figure  5 , was determined. As shown in Figure  10 , the separation started with PEO- _b_ -PPO- _b_ -PEO copolymer with an average composition of 15 PEO and 25 PPO units. From fraction 2 to fraction 17, the amount of PEO constantly decreases, whereas the number of PPO units remains constant. Finally, in fraction 20 only small amounts of copolymers consisting of less than 2 PEO units were monitored. From fractions 23 to 33, PPO homopolymers with an increasing number of PPO units were found. These fi ndings easily enable a quick overview on the chromatographic separation behavior. The separation is characterized by two 

A similar comparison of both the original and combined 2D plot for another copolymer (sample IV) having higher molar masses and different composition is presented in Figure  11 . From these two plots, it becomes obvious that copolymer IV has a much higher amount of PEO units than were found for copolymer I. 

Again, the composite plot constructed using 27 single fractions, whose MALDI spectra were attributed to the chromatographic signal intensity (after normalization), 

_Figure  8 ._ Appearance of MassChrom2D software for one fraction (spectrum view – left) and for fraction 6 (highlighted by a dark-blue rectangle in the bottom window) of a series of 34 fractions taken from a chromatographic run (chromatogram view – right). 

_Macromol. Chem.  Phys._ **2012** , _213_ ,  2404−2411 © 2012  WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &  Co.  KGaA, Weinheim 

**2409** 

www.MaterialsViews.com 

Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics 

S.  M.  Weidner et al. 

www.mcp-journal.de 

_Figure  9 ._ 2D composition plots of (A) nonfractionated PEO- _b_ -PPO- _b_ -PEO copolymer (I), and (B), after reconstruction using intensity values from chromatography for each single fraction, obtained by MassChrom2D software. 

_Figure  11 ._ 2D composition plots of (A) nonfractionated PEO- _b_ -PPO- _b_ -PEO copolymer (IV), and (B), after reconstruction using intensity values from chromatography for each single fraction, obtained by MassChrom2D software. 

shows much higher resolution and less artifacts than that of the original (nonfractionated) sample (Figure  11 A). 

## **4. Conclusion** 

In this work, new MassChrom2D software for the determination of copolymer composition was presented. Our examples demonstrated that this particular software can be used for fast estimation of sample composition of nonfractionated copolymer samples. However, it reveals its full potential only after fractionation, taking advantage of the power of an additional chromatographic separation. Moreover, different chromatographic separation modes for each copolymer unit were monitored. For the chosen chromatographic conditions, a typical SEC-like elution of PEO–PPO copolymers was found. However, this effect is nearly exclusively based on a fast drop of the PEO number, whereas the number of PPO units remains nearly constant. At a certain (low) number of PEO units, the SEC principle is overlaid by additional adsorption effects caused by the PPO units. Finally, a typical separation based on an absorption mechanism was observed for PPO homopolymer side product. These results enable a quick adjustment of chromatographic parameters (e.g., solvent composition and/or columns) to achieve a better separation, and/or could be used for the faster determination of “critical” adsorption conditions of one copolymer unit. 

Acknowledgements :  The authors would like to thank the Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing (BAM) for technical and fi nancial support. 

Received: April 2, 2012 ;  Revised: May 29, 2012 ; Published online: July 12, 2012;  DOI: 10.1002/macp.201200169 

Keywords:  copolymer composition; chromatography; coupling; MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry 

_Figure  10 ._ 2D composition plots of fractionated PEO- _b_ -PPO- _b_ -PEO copolymer (I) obtained by MassChrom2D software (normalized intensity plots). 

- [ 1 ]  V. V. Evreinov , A. V. Gorshkov , T. N. Prudskova , V. V.  Guryanova ,  A. V.  Pavlov ,  A. Y.  Malkin ,  S. G.  Entelis , _Polym.Bull._ **1985** , _14_ ,  131 . 

- [ 2 ]  A. V.  Gorshkov ,  V. V.  Evreinov ,  S. G.  Entelis , _Doklady Akademii Nauk Sssr_ **1983** , _272_ ,  632 . 

_Macromol. Chem.  Phys._ **2012** , _213_ ,  2404−2411 © 2012  WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &  Co.  KGaA, Weinheim 

**2410** 

www.MaterialsViews.com 

Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics 

Copolymer Composition Determined by LC-MALDI-TOF MS .  .  . 

www.mcp-journal.de 

- [ 3 ]  S. G.  Entelis ,  V. V.  Evreinov ,  A. V.  Gorshkov , _Adv. Polym. Sci._ **1986** , _76_ ,  129 . 

- [ 4 ]  J.  Falkenhagen ,  H.  Much ,  W.  Stauf ,  A. H. E.  Muller , _Macromolecules_ **2000** , _33_ ,  3687 . 

- [ 5 ]  D.  Berek ,  M.  Janco ,  K.  Hatada ,  T.  Kitayama ,  N.  Fujimoto , _Polym.J._ **1997** , _29_ ,  1029 . 

- [ 6 ]  H.  Pasch ,  B.  Thrathnigg , _HPLC of Polymers_ ,  Springer Laboratory ,  Berlin Heidelberg New York **1998** . 

- [ 7 ]  G.  Adamus ,  P.  Rizzarelli ,  M. S.  Montaudo ,  M.  Kowalczuk , G.  Montaudo , _Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom._ **2006** , _20_ ,  804 . 

- [ 8 ]  E.  de Goede ,  P.  Mallon ,  H.  Pasch , _Macromol. Mater. Eng._ **2010** , _295_ ,  366 . 

- [ 9 ]  N.  Fandrich ,  J.  Falkenhagen ,  S. M.  Weidner ,  D.  Pfeifer ,  B.  Staal , A. F.  Thunemann ,  A.  Laschewsky , _Macromol. Chem. Phys._ **2010** , _211_ ,  869 . 

- [ 10 ]  I.  Kramer ,  W.  Hiller ,  H.  Pasch , _Macromol. Chem. Phys._ **2000** , _201_ ,  1662 . 

- [ 11 ]  T.  Macko ,  U.  Schulze ,  R.  Brull ,  A.  Albrecht ,  H.  Pasch ,  T.  Fonagy , L.  Haussler ,  B.  Ivan , _Macromol. Chem. Phys._ **2008** , _209_ ,  404 . 

- [ 12 ]  M.  Montaudo , _Abstracts Papers Am. Chem. Soc._ **2000** , _219_ , U392 . 

- [ 13 ]  H.  Pasch ,  L. C.  Heinz ,  T.  Macko ,  W.  Hiller , _Pure Appl. Chem._ **2008** , _80_ ,  1747 . 

- [ 14 ]  I. G.  Romero ,  H.  Pasch , _E-Polym._ **2005** . 

- [ 15 ]  G.  WilczekVera ,  P. O.  Danis ,  A.  Eisenberg , _Macromolecules_ **1996** , _29_ ,  4036 . 

- [ 16 ]  J.  Adrian ,  E.  Esser ,  G.  Hellmann ,  H.  Pasch , _Polymer_ **2000** , _41_ , 2439 . 

- [ 17 ]  D.  Braun ,  I.  Kramer ,  H.  Pasch ,  S.  Mori , _Macromol. Chem. Phys._ **1999** , _200_ ,  949 . 

- [ 18 ]  G. L.  Cheng ,  J.  Cullen ,  C. S.  Wu , _J. Chromatogr. A_ **2011** , _1218_ , 237 . 

- [ 19 ]  P.  Kilz ,  R. P.  Kruger ,  H.  Much ,  G.  Schulz , _Chromatographic Characterization Polym._ **1995** , _247_ ,  223 . 

- [ 20 ]  M. I.  Malik ,  P.  Sinha ,  G. M.  Bayley ,  P. E.  Mallon ,  H.  Pasch , _Macromol. Chem. Phys._ **2011** , _212_ ,  1221 . 

- [ 21 ]  J. A.  Raust ,  L.  Houillot ,  M.  Save ,  B.  Charleux ,  C.  Moire , C.  Farcet ,  H.  Pasch , _Macromolecules_ **2010** , _43_ ,  8755 . 

- [ 22 ]  C.  Schmid ,  S.  Weidner ,  J.  Falkenhagen ,  C.  Barner-Kowollik , _Macromolecules_ **2012** , _45_ ,  87 . 

- [ 23 ]  A.  Siewing ,  B.  Lahn ,  D.  Braun ,  H.  Pasch , _J. Polym. Sci. Part A-Polym. Chem._ **2003** , _41_ ,  3143 . 

- [ 24 ]  G.  J. van Rooij ,  M. C.  Duursma ,  C.  G. de Koster ,  R. M. A.  Heeren , J. J.  Boon ,  P. J. W.  Schuyl ,  E.  R. E. van der Hage , _Anal. Chem._ **1998** , _70_ ,  843 . 

- [ 25 ]  P.  Terrier ,  W.  Buchmann ,  G.  Cheguillaume ,  B.  Desmazieres , J.  Tortajada , _Anal. Chem._ **2005** , _77_ ,  3292 . 

- [ 26 ]  S. M.  Weidner ,  J.  Falkenhagen ,  K.  Knop ,  A.  Thunemann , _Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom._ **2009** , _23_ ,  2768 . 

- [ 27 ]  L.  Coulier ,  E. R.  Kaal ,  T.  Hankemeier , _J. Chromatogr. A_ **2005** , _1070_ ,  79 . 

- [ 28 ]  C. E.  Kassis ,  J. M.  DeSimone ,  R. W.  Linton ,  E. E.  Remsen , G. W.  Lange ,  R. M.  Friedman , _Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom._ **1997** , _11_ ,  1134 . 

- [ 29 ]  T. I.  Stevenson ,  J. A.  Loo , _Lc Gc-Mag. Separation Sci._ **1998** , _16_ , 54 . 

- [ 30 ]  M. W. F.  Nielen , _Anal. Chem._ **1998** , _70_ ,  1563 . 

- [ 31 ]  Y. X.  Wang ,  Y.  Zhou ,  B. M.  Balgley ,  J. W.  Cooper ,  C. S.  Lee , D. L.  DeVoe , _Electrophoresis_ **2005** , _26_ ,  3631 . 

- [ 32 ]  A. S.  Kononikhin ,  E. N.  Nikolaev ,  V.  Frankevich ,  R.  Zenobi , _Eur. J. Mass Spectrom._ **2005** , _11_ ,  257 . 

- [ 33 ]  S. J.  Wetzel ,  C. M.  Guttman ,  K. M.  Flynn , _Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom._ **2004** , _18_ ,  1139 . 

- [ 34 ]  H.  Wei ,  K.  Nolkrantz ,  D. H.  Powell ,  J. H.  Woods ,  M. C.  Ko , R. T.  Kennedy , _Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom._ **2004** , _18_ , 1193 . 

- [ 35 ]  S. D.  Hanton ,  I. Z.  Hyder ,  J. R.  Stets ,  K. G.  Owens ,  W. R.  Blair , C. M.  Guttman ,  A. A.  Giuseppetti , _J. Am. Soc. Mass Spectrom._ **2004** , _15_ ,  168 . 

- [ 36 ]  X. W.  Lou ,  J.  L. J. van Dongen , _J. Mass Spectrom._ **2000** , _35_ , 1308 . 

- [ 37 ]  R. R.  Hensel ,  R. C.  King ,  K. G.  Owens , _Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom._ **1997** , _11_ ,  1785 . 

- [ 38 ]  S. M.  Weidner ,  J.  Falkenhagen ,  S.  Maltsev ,  V.  Sauerland , M.  Rinken , _Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom._ **2007** , _21_ , 2750 . 

ViewS www.MaterialsViews.com 

_Macromol. Chem.  Phys._ **2012** , _213_ ,  2404−2411 © 2012  WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH &  Co.  KGaA, Weinheim 

**2411** 

