**==> picture [57 x 23] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
| [Full] [Paper]<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**==> picture [308 x 23] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
BOI: 10.1002/macp 200500344 ChemistryMacromolecularand Physics = 226<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**==> picture [452 x 179] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Summary: The chromatographic analysis of hydrophilic ‘ea<br>copolymers is complicated due to the fact that in most cases ial<br>aqueous eluents must be used. In aqueous eluents different | bi<br>polar and ionic effects may disturb the selective interactions bia<br>between the macromolecules amd the stationary phase aml 4 bd<br>makingit impossibleto separate such copolymers with regard 6<br>to chemical composition. Therefore, 2D chromatography =so} =—F Pa<br>combining a separation according to composition with a a 1 és<br>separation according to molar mass has been applied mostly 200;<br>tocontnibution polymers thatdescribes are solubleexperimentalin organicapproaches solvents. Theto analyze present ie 3 i“SS -Ea<br>such hydrophilic copolymers by 2D-chromatography. For a to<br>model polymer system resulting from the copolymerization 1.00 °<br>of methacrylic acid and a poly(ethylene glycol} macro- os a<br>monomer, it is shown that different analytical techniques<br>including SEC, LC-CC, MALDI-TOF MS and 2D chroma- 2D separation of poly(MPEG-MM 2), |“ dimension: LC-CC,<br>tography can be used to analyze the different parameters of 2™ dimension: SEC.<br>molecular heterogeneity of such copolymers.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


## Multidimensional Chromatographic and Hyphenated Techniques for Hydrophilic Copolymers, | Analysis of Comb-like Copolymers of Ethylene Oxide and Methacrylic Acid 

## Martina Adler,’ Frank Rittig,* ‘wefan Becker* Harald Pasch** 

'PSs Polymer Standards Service GmbH, In der Dalheimer Wiese 5, 55120 Mainz, Germany * BASF Aktiengesellschafi, Polymer Research, 67056 Ludwigshafen, Germany ‘Deutsches Kunststoff-Institut (German Institute for Polymers), SchloBgartenstr. 6, 64289 Darmstadt, Germany E-mail: hpasch @dki.tu-darmstadt.de 

Received: July 29, 2005; Revised: September 1, 2005; Accepted: September 2, 2005; DOT: 10.1002/macp.2001500344 

Keywords: FT-IR; graft copolymers; high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC); MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry; Microstructure; separation techniques 

## Introduction 

Polymers are highly complex multicomponent materials. They are composed of macromolecules varying in chain length, chemical composition, and architecture. Depending on the composition of the monomer feed and the polymerization procedure, different lypes of heterogeneities tay become important. 

One very efficient approach for the analysis of the molecular heterogencily of complex polymers is their chromatographic separation by combining different separalion mechanisms. A typical experimental protocol includes the separation of the sample according lo composition yielding fractions which are chemically homoge= neous. These fractions are transferred lo a sive-selective separation melhod and analyzed with respect to molar mass. 

Macromol Chem. Ploys. 2M, 206, 2269-2277 

**==> picture [277 x 23] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
oS© interewe  clenceme © 20S WILEY-VCH Verlag.GmbH & Co. Kita@A, Weinhoun<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


2270 ChemistryauralPhysics 

ML Adler, F Rinip, & Bocker, H. Pasch 

As a result of this two-dimensional (2D) separation, PEO resulls in reaction products that sull contain large information on both types of molecular belerogencily is 9 amounts of non-grafled PEO. In the present contnibution obtained. Another useful approach is the combination ofa = we report on the analysis of comb-hke copolymers of selective chromatographic technique with a powerful ethylene oxide and methacrylic acid, which were prepared speclroscopic method like NMR or MALDI-TOP mass through copolymerization of spectrometry.!"! acrylic acid by interaction chromatography,a macromonomerMALDI-TOF and methThere are numerous selective modes for LC of polymers, mass spectrometry and 2D chromatography. including liquid chromatography at the crilical point of adsorption (LC-CC}**! and isocratic or gradient HPLC"! Using these techniques polymers can be Experimental Part separated selectively with regard to chemical composition Samples or functionality, as has been shown lor macromonomers, ° ; random and block copolymers, and polymer blends.!*-*! The macromonomers MPEG-MM | and MPEG-MM 2 were LC-CC and gradient HPLC are promising first dimensions = commercial products of Sigma-Aldrich Chemie GmbH ina 2D chromatography setup. These can be combined with = (Munich, Germany). The preparation of the comb-shaped size exclusion chromatography (SEC) in the second dihomopolymer (sample |) was accomplished as follows: A two mension that yields the corresponding molar mass distnliter Blass caratsequipped with a thermometer, a mechanical adit, stirrer, a nitrogen purge device, a reflux condenser, a monomer a chain-transfer So far;* 2D chromatography has been applicd mostly to addition pump, an initiator addition pump, and polymers 3 agent addition pump was used. The monomer pump was charg typically, inthalthe arefirstsolubledimensionin binaryorganiceluentssolvents.are used,Very edaqueous with 668.00solutiong ofof macromonomermethoxy poly(ethylene MPEG-MMglycol)2 (50) wt.-%mono eg., letrahydrofuran-hexane, while in the second dimenmethacrylate with a number-average molar mass of 1000 g/ sion THF ts the eluent Al present we are nol aware of any mol), the initiator pump with a solution of 5.00 g sodium applications, where agucous mobile phases are used in both peroxodisulfate in 58.56 ¢ water, and the chain-transfer agent dimensions when LC-CC and SEC are coupled in the 2D pump with 29.22 ¢ of a 40 wi-% aqueous sodium bisulfite experimental setup. solution. The reactor was charged with 235.19 ¢ water. With nerThere: are several— challenges: related to the useTheof aqueousi ssnitrogen,palina © Teactor ees thewasceauaalaecd to per > eeunder oe pee mupee nes eeceiroma me eae e eee atmosphere. Simultaneously starting, the monomer polymers that are to be analyzed using such conditions are ae : ‘ : a : pee water-soluble polar or tonic copolymers. Even the SEC Wer Seno pempe ea pineal os Pe ate), i : the initiator and the chain-transfer-agent over a period of 5 h analysis of copolymers analyzed in aqueous mobile phases and 30 min, respectively. The internal temperature of the is not straightforward. In addition tothe factihatonly avery peactor was maintained at 100°C for one more hour to com limited numberof stationary phases 1s available for aqueous plete the polymerization reaction. Finally, the resultant SEC, the experiments in most cases cannol be conducted in reaction mixture was cooled to RT and a pH 7 was adjusted pure water, Due to the high polarity or the ionic nature of by adding a 50 wt.-% aqueous sodium hydroxide solution. the polymers, electrolytes or ion-pairing reagents have lo be The comb-shaped copolymers (samples 2-4) have been added to the eluent to screen ionic interactions with the — Syuthesized by copolymerizing methacrylic acid (MAA) with stationary phase, for more details see Mori and Barth.!'! the macromonomer MPEG-MM 2 according to the Same Sali solutions, on the other hand, can cause severe problems procedure as the homopolymer and er finally neutralized for the SECiia detector. with 50) wh-% sodium hydroxide solution. The following As me , amounts of reactants were used, see Table |. fewanalysis applicationsfor HPLCof water-soluble ain TSESao the literaturecopolymers motile so far.eeby HPLCRegarding are onlymethods the 2 eachgijyedAfter sample withthe the (allindividual eluent between toaconcentrationdetermination 30 and 35 wt.-%)of ofthe1 theg/Lsolid samples solidscontent for were oneof and) the determination of the chemical composition dimensional measurements and two 10 g/L solids for coupled distribution of such copolymers the only publications relate methods. to copolymers of ethylene oxide and propylene oxide,!"7! partially hydrolyzed poly(vinyl acetate)!'®! poly(styrene sulfonate) and poly(acrylic acid).|""! Chromatographic System Recently, we reported “ the sa i of copoly ieee that A Shinada LC-10AD-VP HPLC eyitenicomprizing = pump, werepoly(ethyleneprepared by grafling oF monies en anid OMG an autosamplerand a RI detectorwas used. For 2D expenments phy.'""! The grafiglycol) copolymersby multidimensionalwere analyzed withchromatogra- regard to anLaboratories,evaporativeUK)lightandscatteringan additional detectorpump ELSwere1000added.(PolymerThe the complex chemical composilion-molar mass helerogentransfer of the fractions was carried out with a 8-port-2 eily by coupled HPLC-FTIR and 2D chromatography. We _ position switching valve type ET8GW (Valco Instruments Co. showed thal the direct grafting of methacrylic acid onto Inc.) with two 100 pL sample loops. For daia collection and Macromol. Chem. Phys. BMS, 206, 2269-2277 wire mcg join dhe © 2005 WILRY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinkcim 

ChemistryMacromolecularandPhysics 2771 

|[Mubtidiicndonal][Chromatographic][ and Hyphenated][Techniques][for][Hydrophile:][Copolyorers,][1] 

|Table<br>1.|Experimental|conditions forcopolymerization reactions.|conditions forcopolymerization reactions.||||
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Sample*|Reactor|Charge intomonomer|monomerpump|Charge into initiatorpump|pump|Charge intochain-transfer|
|||||||agentpump|
||Water|MPEG-MM2|= Methacrylic acid|Sodium<br>peroxodisulfate|Water|40% Aqueous sodium<br>bisulfitesolution|
||a|&|B|&|B|&|
|2 (90: 10)|268.453|601.20|33.40)|5.00,|58.56|29.22|
|3 (80:20)|301.93|aS4 40|66.80)|5.00)|58.56|29.22|
|4(70:30)|435.33|467.60)|100-20|5.00)|38.56|29.22|



*(weight ratio MPEG-MM 2 to methacrylic acid). 

processing the software package “WinGPC-Software”™ (Poly Results and Discussion mer Standards Service GmbH, Mainz, Germany) was used. . : Molar mass calibration was based on PEG. The injection sis present Coates: were prepared by copehyneiasvolumes were 50) iL for the one dimensional experiments and tion of methacrylic acid (MAA) and a poly(ethylene oxide) 100 pL for the 2D experiments. macromonomer, sce Scheme |. The macromonomer (MPEG-MM) was synthesized from poly(ethylene glycol) fags monomethyl ether (MPEG) and MAA. Accordingly, in : j addition to the macromenomer the reacuon product may The LC-CC experiments were performed on a Knauer contain residual MPEG and MAA. The copolymerization Nucleosil RPI8-100 (250 = 4.6 mm inner diameter (1.d.)) of MAA and the macromonomer was Initiated with the [reeHPLC column and the SEC experiments on a PSS Suprema radical initialor sodium peroxodisulfate. The resulting FSAlinearM (300 = 8 mm id.) column. For the 2D measurementsa copolymers are distibuted in al least three parameters: aeee icine ee: ignema pomTiippspecdfea(0) < pl2mm eet aia) (1)and the(3) **t** otalhe chain molarlength mass, of (2) thethe PEO copolymer grafis. In composition,addition, the a copolymer can be contaminated by small amounts of homopolymers poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAA) and Mobile Phase P(MPEG-MM). Methanol HPLC grade (Acros, Belgium); water in ultrapure : For # detailed analysis of the Cee of the reaction, the quality (Simplicity system, Millipore Co.); tris(hydroxy different starting and intermediate matenals have been methylaminojmethane (TRIS) pa. (Acros, Belgium), NaCl analysed by liquid chromatography. As the macromonomer pa. (Sigma-Aldrich, USA); NaN, pa. (Acros, Belgium); = and the precursor MPEG used in the present study are ammonium acetate p.a. (Acros, Belgium). technical products, it was important lo analyze their purity. 

**==> picture [312 x 176] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Oo<br>Pp(Oo ™"Trov1. CH.<br>MPEG MAA MPEG-MM<br>|<br>¥ OH<br>A O<br>Hot oO<br>Scheme 1. Copolymerization of methacrylic acid and poly(ethylene glycol) macro-<br>monomer.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Mocromal, Cherm. Phys 2004S, 206, 2269-227) wari joiriealdke 

© 205 WILEY-VCH Verlag GinkH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim 

## ITD Choumty ad Phjnkcs 

**==> picture [114 x 22] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
M. Auller, F. Rittig, §. Boeker, H. Pasch |<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**==> picture [462 x 625] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Such analysis can be conducted by liquid chromalography A<br>al cnlical conditions (LC-CC). At the critical point of .<br>adsorption for PEG, LC-CC separates MPEG and the —<br>macromonomer with regard lo their endgroups irrespective Se<br>of molar mass. Typical LC-CC conditions for PEO are a d - F<br>non-polar stationary phase of RP-18 (octadecyl modified i 46 | :<br>silica gel) and a mobile phase composition of methanol- - ;<br>water 81:19 wh-9%. “6 } :<br>Al critical conditions, PEGs of different molar masses rea ;<br>elute al the same clution volume. This is imdicated in 0 Ce Ht ecg leateninbrinigonseigitdl<br>Figure 1A fora molar mass range of 400—35 000 2/mol.The O53 70 15 20 25 30°95 40 45 50 55 60 645<br>staring PEG and the resulting MPEG elute under these Elution Volume [mL]<br>chromatographic conditions in single uniform peaks, see<br>Figure 1B and C. Complemented by MALDI-TOF analy- i<br>ses, Uhis clearly indicates thal both samples are homo- om 5<br>geneous with regard to their endgroups and only Se<br>polydisperse regarding molar mass. @ 000s |<br>The analysis of two different reaction products of @ 0.008 ;<br>MPEG and MAA is presented in Figure 2 and compared 5 o00s 4 | i<br>to the elution pattern of MPEG. The chromatograms of 3 oe | |! i<br>MPEG-MM | and 2 indicate directly that the chemical | | !<br>compositions of the two reaction products are different. — i<br>While MPEG-MM 2, exhitits one major clution peak al — aa ag i A ae a a i i i<br>2.8 mL with a very small second peak al 2.5 mL, MPEG- Elution Volume [mL]<br>MM 1 has a trimodal distribution with a small peak eluting<br>al 1.8 mL, followed by peaks al 2.5 mL and 2.8 mL. In this en:<br>case the peak al 2.5 mL is quile significant. can Cc<br>A comparison of the peak elution volumes in Figure 2A Rasen:<br>Cindicates<br>[To] [verify] [this] [assumption,] [the] [samples] [were,] [o.ot0] Fi<br>subjectedto [MPEG.] tothat the MALDI-TOFelution peak mass al spectrometry 2.5mL couldforcorrespond analysis. ©= a.o1Ts9.0725 | H<br>The measurements were carried oul in the posttive-linear fy 0.0100 | 3<br>mode with dithranol as the matrix.<br>As cation donor LiCl was : pipet i<br>added and, accordingly, the formation of [M-+Li]t san j<br>molecular ions can be assumed. an ond tl<br>The MALDI-TOF spectrum of MPEG in 05 10 16 20 25 30 35 49 45 50 55 60 &5<br>Figure 3A shows one uniform oligomer distribution with Elution Volume [mL]<br>the highest peak intensity ranging from 1 000—1 150 Da Figure 1. LC-OC elugrams of PEGs of different molar masses<br>which is in good agreement with the nominal molar (red: 400, green: 970, blue: 6000, black: 12 000, pink: 35 000 g/<br>mass of about 1000 g/mol. The mass peaks can be altribu- mol) (A), PEG 970 (B) and MPEG (C), stationary phase: Knawer<br>ted to poly(ethylene ~~ glycol), monomethylether Nucleosil RP18-100, mobile phase: MeOQH/water 81:19 wt.-%,<br>oligomers: detector ESD.<br>MPEG : CH,0—(—CH,CH,0 a H<br>[M+ Lif? = 39 + 44n a ‘ oe ic: :<br>for n=2A° [M4-Li]* = 1095 Dna (calc) MPEG-MM - CH,0-{—CH)CH,0-), -COC(CH;}=CH,<br>IM + Lil’ = 1095 Da (exp.) PS = lin<br>for a — 20 [M + Li]? — 987 Da (calc.)<br>The fact that no other oligomer series is detected [M + Li] — 987 Da (exp.)<br>complements the LC-CC result that the sample is uniform<br>with regard lo the endgroups.A similarly uniform MALDI- For macromonomer MPEG-MM 1 a more complex<br>TOF spectrum is obtained for the macromonomer MPEG- MALDLTOP spectrum is obtained, see Figure 3B. The<br>MM 2, see Figure 3C. The oligomer series in this casc can) = major oligomer senes indicated by (X) can, similar lo<br>be assigned to the expected macromonomer structure and 1s MPEG-MM 2, be attributed to the macromonomer oligo-<br>in perfect agreement with the LC-CC result: mers. The second oligomer senes (JEP) thal appears in the<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Macromal, Chem. Phys. MWS, 2M, 269-2277 were cp jcremaal abe 

© 2005 WILEY-VCH Worlag CambH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim 

**==> picture [496 x 699] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Macromolecular<br>Multidimenaonal Chromatographic and Hypienated Tochsrques for Hydrophilic Copolymers, 1 ChemistryandPhysics T9735<br>ce) ai<br>0.0225 es<br>Bigirs ei) 50<br>Bs 2.0150<br>© pes i us |<br>3 oated 7 = |<br>2B oscrs : a<br>tons a | L<br>os 1.0 145 20 Elution25 ET) Volumea5  [mL]ao 45 ao 5 ao as a1": | i ii | | HH]| | |<br>n.0038: and fo: a5 ce edusl aa jana<br>a.na00<br>SS ons =m ae<br>a O.0180 ba x x<br>qe ows z a<br>ooine i we 8 x a<br>nee E { BE. x || x<br>ae0.0900 Ve i me * | x<br>Os 16 15 L-] as ad & 40 45 So Ly eo as a *%<br>Elution Volume [mL] = p =<br>| x<br>to 10 T T f | | x<br>70 Moca<br>EB euZ ao oe 1a wad a Vane<br>a 3<br>ong<br>i 50 [Bi] ‘ami,<br>a0 oi<br>20‘6 pF 7 C<br>t- 7 E 7:<br>os 1.0 15 20 25 a0 36 40 45 50 es oo as it |<br>Elution Volume [mt] :<br>MPEG-MMFigure 2.  2LC-OC ((C), chromatographic elugrams of MPEG conditions see Figure (.A), MPEG-MM 1 (B)and1. aia | | |<br>" | | | | |<br>spectrum al a rather low intensily can be assigned to $03 200 08 1am ac 700 vane<br>residual MPEG as is indicated in the corresponding chro- em<br>malogram, sce Figure 2B. The chromatographic fraction Figure 3. MALDI-TOFspectra of MPEG (A), [MPEG-MM] [1] [(B)]<br>SppeHrppearing atF 1.8 mb +in FigureEG . 2B wasac too smallee to be7 and MPEG-MM 2 (C).<br>detected by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry.<br>The amounts of by-products in the samples MPEG-MM<br>can be estimated roughly from the peak areas of the eluuion = by aqueous SEC on a stationary phase of PSS Suprema<br>peaks in Figure 2. The concentration ofthe main by-product — linear M (300% 8 mm id.) with an aqueous eluent of the<br>MPEG is roughly 29 wi.-% for MPEG-MM I and 2 wt.-% following composition: water, TRIS (trishydroxymethyl-<br>for MPEG-MM 2, while the concentrationof the by-product aminoethane) 0.08 mol/L, NaCl 0.15 mol/L, NaN, 0.01 mol!<br>al 1.8 mL ts less than 2 wo-% in MPEG-MM 1 and not L. The flow rate was| mL/minand the detection was carried<br>detectable in MPEG-MM 2. oul with a RI detector. The SEC elution profile of the sample<br>‘To investigate the polymerization behavior of the macro- is shown im Figure 4.<br>monomer, sample MPEG-MM 2 was polymerized to form The clution pattern indicales a separation of different<br>the homopolymer poly(MPEG-MM 2) (sample 1). The oligomers. The peak at 12.4 mL corresponds to the system<br>molar mass distribution of this homopolymer was analyzed = peak. This peak overlaps with the monomer peak. The<br>Mocromai, Chem. Pines, 2005, 206, 2269-2277 ww we poe be © 2005 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**==> picture [465 x 701] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Macromolecular i<br>oo | ‘art.<br>je iK. =| Rats Fraction 4<br>id2 oomnaz || || | ;"|| * x | Piil<br>3 no | | | j 3a ¥ * |<br>1010 | fw | 7<br>|| | | 'j H|<br>noes. | \5 10) \ | *<br>fpeppereee<br>mood / \ | | } 1<br>eee pee ciel TreeLass AAiAa rereMAdeLA MAAAAALAAA WAAL badd m0)| \ i \ al, { i | | i )<br>lution Volurnme [mL] abe Be 103 Hoo 1a 1a<br>btaee hoe pe<br>Figure 4. SEC elugram of sample 1, stationary phase: Suprema sant<br>linear M, mobile phase: water, TRIS 0.08 mol/L, NaCl0.15 mol/L, x Fraction 3<br>NaN, 0.01 mol/L, detector: RI. bel<br>an! FI<br>| x<br>ao}<br>lowest observable oligomer al 11.8 miL is due to the dimer, 7!<br>the shoulder al 11.2 mL contains oligomers from the timer al x +<br>to the hexamer. At elution volumes less than 10.5 mL higher ‘al ai 58 ‘<br>oligomersFor a moreare specificeluted.  analysis of the homopolymer a LC- aolal || %| | le 1 | 4|<br>CC separation was conducted using the same chromato- wal | = F é<br>graphic conditions thal have been used for MPEG and aol | | el” i | | F P| | *,<br>MPEG-MM. The corresponding chromatogram in Figure 5 a | | ru 1 be td FT tH dial<br>indicates thal the sample is nol homogencous bul contains al me ime wantin ae, me<br>species of different chemical compositions. wie<br>The latest eluting small peak appears al roughly 2.5 mL Fraction 2<br>and could correspond to residual MPEG that was found as a a<br>by-product in the macromonomer, see Figure 2. Another i<br>small peak elutes at about 2.1 mL while the major partof the |<br>sample elutes al 1.0—-2.0 mL. To analyze the chemical ™| |<br>composition of the different elution peaks the sample was “a |<br>fractionated and the [ractions analyzed by MALDI-TOF (a |<br>mass spectrometry. The significant advantage of MALDI- " if<br>TOF over other spectroscopic techniques is that very ™ Dimer shies Tetramer<br>frequently only an analytical LC-CC separation is required a 1 | | r<br>to accumulate sufficient amounts for analysis. 10) Jit alas it<br>tooo 1500 Pa Poa IMG 1500 00 Ol |<br>Wiaee Sher pe<br>F 1 313 4 Figure 6. MALDI-TOF<br>ome3 LC-CC separation in Figurespectra5. of fractions 2-4 of sample 1 from<br>aia! | — 2 ee<br>7 umd | | As was expected, [raction 4 is due to residual MPEG.<br>z 3 ie | This compound 1s also found toa certain extent in frachion 3,<br>coe | | | see oligomer series (*)in Figure 6_ In addition to MPEG the<br>: cla | | spectrum of fraction 3 indicates a second (major) oligomer<br>coe i \ j senes that corresponds to non-reacted macromonomer<br>oan -4 | 4 rn ; MPEG-MM (@). The most interesting spectrum is obtained<br>A, Peeeen Oe Aa ed Uh ? — forfraction 2, see Figure 6. In addition to oligomer series for<br>a i, a ie A A A i acs MPEG and MPEG-MM tn the low mass range of 600<br>Exon Volare rik] 1 300 Da, three new oligomer series A, B,C are oblained al<br>Figure 5.) LC-OC elugram of sample 1, chromatographic con- higher masses from 1900 Da on. The peak-to-peak mass<br>ditions see Figure 1, fractionation into four fractions is indicated. increments are 44 Da and indicate MPEG-MM derivatives.<br>Macromol Chem. Phys. MMS, 2, 2259-2277 wwrminop-journal abe © 2005 WILEY-VCH Verlag GinbH & Co. KGaA, Wonkcun<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**==> picture [492 x 672] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
SMultidimensonal Choomatographic and Hyphonated “Tochniques for Hydrophilec Copolymers, | Chemisty and Physles 9975<br>The mass differences between the oligomer series are as A<br>roughly 1000 Da and correspond to the molar mass of the B<br>macromonomer. ILcan, lherelore, be assumed thal the oligo- a<br>mer series A, B, and C belong to multiples of MPEG-MM, H i |<br>ie., the dimer (A), trimer (B), and tetramer (C), respec- 5 ee :<br>molar mass oligomers. These could not be detected by : » z<br>tively.MALDI-TOKIt can behowever, assumeddue thatto fractionlow concentration,1 contains higherhgh a» wy | ij<br>molar mass, and high polydispersity. 104 }<br>As has been shown, LC-CC can be used very efficiently lo 5 a i<br>detect by-products in the present macromonomer and = Ba fet ee A RES<br>homopolymer. In the next step, the copolymerizationtah of : on Volume [rol]<br>MPEG-MM with methacrylic acid shall be analyzed. The 100]<br>copolymerization was conducted in an aqueous solution of Bo<br>with sodium persulfate as inilialor. The feed composition eo]<br>was varied between 10, 20, and 30 wi-% of methacrylic = = 7 |<br>acidmolaracid (samples in compositionsthe feed. 2, 3, and of 4). 58, Such 72, and $4 composition mol-% corresponds methacrylic to noi eea4 | i.j<br>The separation of the resulting copolymers by LC-CC is . ne 4<br>shown in Figure 7. Again, critical conditions for PEG are os f<br>used to compensate for the effect of the PEO molar mass | cient IF<br>distribution. 6 1) if 26 28 a0 a8 do 48 So 8S 60 48<br>As could be expected, the copolymers yield chromato- Elution Volume [mL]<br>grams thal are very similar to the chromatogram of<br>Poly(MPEG-MMthat the samples contain2). A small residualelution MPEG. peak Dueat 2.5 to mL the higher shows 100oj | c 1<br>polarity of the copolymer fractions, these elute before the of |<br>MPEG al elution volumes of 1.0—-2.2 mL. From the peak a m4 |<br>areas and a corresponding calibration, the amounts of & mee .<br>residual MPEG can be determined quantitatively. Accord- me | j<br>ingly, sample 1 contains 3 wl-% of MPEG, while samples 2 i oi :<br>and 3 contain both 2 wt-% of MPEG. si x) | i<br>The copolymer fractions cluting before MPEG at elution and I '<br>volumes of 1.0—2.2 mL exhibit trimodal distributions thal 4 = ee Precis lf<br>can be caused by mullimodaliies in molar mass or in 06 10 46 20 28 30 24 40 45 50 85 60 85<br>chemical composition. To detect differences in chemical Elution Volume {ml<br>composition, the LC-CC separation is combined with FTIR Figure 7. LC-CC elugrams of copolymers of MPEG-MM and<br>detection through the LC-Transform interface. The design MAA, chromatographic conditions see Figure 1, samples: 2 (A),<br>concept and the operation of the interface is described in 3(B), 4 (C).<br>refs.'"'"**! Briefly, the eluate leaving the chromatographic<br>separation syslem is sprayed onto a rolaling Germanium<br>disc through a heated nebulizer nozzle. ‘The mobile phase — ured al a wavenumber of 1100 em~', while the concen-<br>evaporates and the polymer [ractions are deposited as tracks =~ tralion profile of the methacrylic acid unils is measured al a<br>of solid material. After depositing all LC-CC fractions, the = wavenumber of 1580 em".<br>Germanium dise is placed into the transmission part of the The results of the LC-FTIR analysis of sample 4 1s shown<br>FTIR spectrometer and spectra are taken from all positions in Figure §. As can be seen, the concentration profiles for<br>of the disc. As the result of the measurements, spectra of all == EG and MAA are very similar indicating a rather bomo-<br>fractions are obtained that are used for identilicalion ofthe = geneous distnbution of the two monomers across the<br>chenncal structures. Concentration profiles of different elution peak. A detailed analysis of the concentration<br>chemical species can be obtained by plotting specific FTIR profiles indicates thal the earlier cluting [ractions contain<br>intensilics as a function of clution volume. The tolal = higher amounts of MAA.<br>concentration profile (Gram-Schmidt plot) is obtained by By far the deepest insight into the complexity of the<br>summarizing all intensities over all wavenumbers. The present copolymers can be obtained by 2D chromatogra-<br>concentration profile of the ethylene glycol units is meas- phy. On-line coupled 2D chromatography combines the<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Macrunnl, Chem, Piogs, 2005, Pik, 2269-2277 ww wunep- journal abe 

© 2005 WILEY-VCH Verlap GibH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim 

**==> picture [117 x 18] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Macromolecular<br>2276 Chemistryandand Physics<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**==> picture [481 x 690] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Chemistryandand Physics ML. Adler, P. Ritz, §. Becker, H. Pasch<br>3.8] 100<br>aa zm 3.50 a<br>8<br>=4 c=<br>B06 2.00 hd<br>£;<br>a04 i<br>z } 2.00 LV fifezze aaa,<br>10 sf — =——*<br>D005 05 05 ee10 1.5 15 1820 23 25 26 9093 95 34 40 A —— 40<br>Elution Volume [mL] 1 " ; 5 q<br>10 10 10<br>Figure $8 LC-CC/PTIR. analysis of sample 4, chromatographic<br>conditions see Figure 1, Gram-Schmidt plot (solid), EG (dotted),<br>MAA (dashed). is<br>0<br>separation with regard lo chemical composition in the first a60 4<br>dimension with the analysis of the resulling fractions oo i<br>regarding molar mass in the second dimension. In the — ,4, a i 70<br>present case, LC-CC ts used for separating the copolymer ~ s<br>samples into the ruc copolymer and residual precursors or a 2 ; -<br>by-products such as MPEG or the macromonomer. sai i SS so Re Be<br>2D chromatography requires a powerful detector for the a & (<= >) 40<br>second dimension. For applications with organic solvents = 2.00 Ui ini 30<br>like tetrahydrofuran an evaporative light scallering detector (i 5<br>(ELSD) can easily be used. This is not possible for aqueous 4.50 Se) ae<br>SEC at the previously discussed experimental conditions. B 10<br>Due to the salt-containing eluent the spray nozzle ol the ‘ari a<br>detector gets blocked. A RI detector cannot be used in 2D- Pa ‘at ia!<br>LCdimensions.enbecause Thetheeee detectionsystemreer usesproblemdifferentA was.  solvedeluents7 byin usingboth- dimension:Figure 10. LC-CC.2D separations 2™ dimension:of samples SEC. 3 (A) and 4 (B), :<br>ammonium acetate as a volatile salt. Using water-ammo-<br>tium acelale as the mobile phase il became possible to use The 2D analysis of sample 1 is shown in Figure 9. In<br>the ELSD as detector!?"! verlical direction the sample is separated into chemically<br>different fractions by LC-C'C while the horizontal direction<br>too | TePresents the molar mass separation. Obviously, Lhe sam-<br>ple contains Lhree chemically different species with two of<br>ail 1 aoiad themSpecies being| similarwith a in molar molar mass mass.of roughly 1000 g/mol can<br>200, FED) 3 a be assigned readily to the precursor MPEG that was already<br>apes — detected by LC-CC in Figure 5 and MALDI-TOF analysis.<br>= i = — tad Species 2 as the major component of the sample can be<br>250 iata _— ee a5 assigned to the true poly(MPEG-MM 2) homopolymer. The<br>a —_— molar mass determined from the 2D experiment is My<br>co<br>on 2 17.000 g/mol and in good agreement with the SEC analysis<br>cd given in Figure 4. Finally, species 3 has a molar mass close<br>ae to the homopolymer (M,,— 12500 g/mol) but is shifted<br>ss towards higher clulion volumes in the first dimension<br>a<br>indicating a lower polarity. The chemical structure of this<br>; ; 7 Q [fraction is subject to further investigations. The relative<br>19 hid hi concentrations of the different species are 1.5% (1), 95.8%<br>Figure 9, 21D separation of sample 1, 1" dimension: LC-CC, an (2), and 2.1% (3), respectively. This clearly imdicates that<br>dimension: SEC. sample | is rather pure homopolymer.<br>Macromol, Chem. Phys. MWS, 206, 2209-2277 weve mcg jenarmial_che @ 2005 WILEY-VCH Verlag GinbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Macromolecular ChemistryandPhysics VTT 

Mulidimenuonal Chromatographic and Hyplenated Tochonypucs for Hydrophilic Copelymers, | 

‘Table 2. Composition of samples 3 and 4 as determined by 25-LC. Sample MPEG Homopolymer Copolymer Amount ity Amount My Amount Me % g/mol ip 2/mol 7 g/mol 4 (4 O80 19.6 16500) To 4 40) 90) 4 07 1000 5.3 8600 93.6 40100 Similar to the homopolymer, copolymers of different that the copolymerization of methacrylic acid and a PEGcomposilions were analyzed by 2D chromatography, sec macromonomer (PEG-MM) resulis in the formation Figure 10. The appearance of the resulling contour plolsis = poly(PEG-MM) in addition Lo the copolymer. significantly different from the contour plot of the homopolymer. As has been experienced in a number of other : oe cases, the resolution of the first dimension (LC-CC) is Acknowledgements: The present results are part of a joint oer eputicentlyHees Eile ‘ gohan ae : : ee project. The authors gratefully acknowledgethe financial supportof thal in the 2Dseeeeet:expenmentsThistheis,flow apparently,rate of thesefirst ssdimen-fact the project by BASFAktiengesellschafi, Ludwigshafen, Germany. sion 1s significantly lower as compared to standard LCCC experiments. The 2D contour plot for sample 3 is shown in Figure 10A. conLainsSimilarve iaviareto Oshathe homopolymer; in_Figure 9, eethis sampleie also fy HA. Pasch, saiAdv. Polym.peniea eeSei 2000,+ 80150, 1. plot as speciesminoraeons1. The molar of massMPEG ofthat this appearfractionin the is roughly contour [2] S.Sei G.1986.Entelis,76. V.129.V. Evreinov, A. V, Gorshkov, Adv Polym. 1000 g/mol. In the high molar mass region lwo species are [3] S. G. Entelis, V. V. Evreinov, A. L Kuzaev, Reactive obtained, species2 having a molar mass of ca. 16-000 g/mol Oligomers, Khimiya, Moscow 1985. and species 3 wilh a molar mass of ca. 40000 g/mol. The [4] H. Pasch, Adv. Polym. Sei, 1997, 1281. chromatographica behavioura of“4 species 2 1s very similariat to IP] ee NEETnao, Cross ihe nya of poly(MPEG-MM 2) as can be seen ina [6] H. COR,Pasch, B. Trathnigg,eB HPLC of Polymers,a Springer, Figure 9. ILis, therefore, tentatively assumed thal the sample Heidelberg 1997. contains a fraction of homopolymenzed macromonomer. [7] H. Pasch, C. Brinkmann, ¥. Gallot, Polymer 1993, 34, 4009. Accordingly, species 3 can be assigned to the copolymer [8] H. Pasch, Y. Gallot, B. Trathnigg, Polymer 1993, 34, 4986. fraction. As is expected, the molar sia is lene? HS 19] Eel a He parra Hadjichriscompared to the homopolymer fraction. IL is interesting Lo [10] S. Mori, H. G. Barth, Size Exclusion Chromatography, mention thal the projection of the copolymer peak has a Springer, Heidelberg 1999. posilive slope Lowards lower molar masses. This indicates (11) H. Pasch, L Zammert, J Liquid Chromatogr 1994, 17,3091. that separation in the LC-CC dimension takes place [12] Pa —_o H. Pasch, K. Albert, Polymer Bull, 1997, according to decreasing molar cries shea finding, = int [13] B. perieel Trathnigg, D. Thamer, X. Yan, B. Maier, H.-R. Holzbauer, SEC agreement wilh the theory of LC-OC that predicts an H. Much, J. Chromatogr. A 1994, 665, 47. mode for the polymer backbone al critical conditions [14] B. Trathnigg, B. Maier, D. Thamer, J. Liguid Chromatogr of the PEO grafts.!"! 1994, 17, 4785, The contour plot for sample4 in Figure [0B indicates that = [91 5. L- Phillips. L. Ding, M. Stegemiller, 5. V. Ollesik, Amul. tisBieri supple AETeeuneAy contsins alywith sninoramoentsChe mae of aecennne ofhomopolyimes: Bi ig)[17] H.51Pasch,paigeC. Brinkmann,§ V.Oe;H.AnalMuch, ChmU. Just, 2003,J. 73,Chromatogr54 in the monomer feed that results in the preferential for1992, 623, 315. mation of copolymer molecules. [18] J. V. Dawkins,T.A. Nicholson, A.J. Handley, E. Meehan, A. Theoiequantitativeca pscomposition of the two samples 1s 19] S.aia"L. Phillips, P ‘ Shaw,L. Ding,sariM. Stegemiller,T3351.S. V. Olesik,‘ Anal. ir[ere] ved inne Tableaes 2. | Chem. 2003, 75, 5539. [20] H. Pasch, M. Adler, F. Rittig, 8. Becker, Macromal Rapid Conclusiona [21] L.M.Commun. Wheeler,2005,J.26, N. 4358. Willis, Appl Spectrose. 1993, 47, 1128lt has been shown that hydrophilic copolymers can be [22] JN. Willis, JL. Dwyer, L. M. Wheeler, Polym. Mater Sci. analyzed by different methods of liquid chromatography nian gg haFeote aes ee 7 ; ifs “al Be [23] JN. Willis, JL. Dwyer, M.X. Liu, Pre: InternationalGPC while 2D-chromatographyyields information provideson — ayaainformationLao on ahimolar [24] SymposiumM. Adler, Ph.D.94, LakeThesis, BuenaTechnischeVista, FLUniversitit1994. Darmstadt, mass as a function of chemical composition. It is shown 24. Macromol. Chem. Phys, 205, 2th, 2260-2277 wrwmep-pourtal abe © 2006 WILEY-VCH Verlag CimbH & Co. KGaA, Weinkoin 

