RAPID COMMUNICATIONS IN MASS SPECTROMETRY Rapad Commun. Mass Spectrom. 2007; 21: 2750-2758 Published online in Wiley InterScence (www interscence.wiley.com) DOL 10.1002/ rom.314h 

## A novel software tool for copolymer characterization. . by coupling of liquid chromatography with matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization* . * . time-of-flight. = mass spectrometry 

Steffen M. Weidner'*, Jana Falkenhagen', Sergey Maltsev', Volker Sauerland” and Marian Rinken® 

"Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing (BAM), Dept. | ‘Analytical Chemistry, Reference Materials’, Richard-Willstactier-Strasse 11, D-12489 Berlin, Germany “Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Fahrenheitstrasse 4, D-28359 Bremen, Germany “Dow Deutschland Anlagengesellschaft mbH, Buetzflether Sand, D-21683 Stade, Germany Received 74 May 2007; Revised 18 June 2007; Accepted 19 June 2007 

The results of copolymer characterization by coupling of chromatography and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS) techniques and subsequent calculation of copolymer composition using a novel software tool ‘MassChrom2D’ are presented. For high-resolution mass analysis copolymer samples were fractionated by means of liquid adsorption chromatography (LAC). These fractions were investigated off-line by MALDI-TOF MS. Various mono-n-butyl ethers of polyethylene oxide-polypropylene oxide copolymers (PEOco-PPO) were investigated. As well as the copolymer composition presented in two-dimensional plots, the applied approach can give additional hints on specific structure-dependent separation conditions in chromatography. Copynght ((:) 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

A conventional two-dimensional (2D) analysis of polymer can be typically performed by coupling liquid adsorption chromatography at ‘critical’ conditions (LACCC) and sizeexclusion chromatography (SEC). The principle of this coupling method, also known as orthogonal chromatography, has been extensively described,’? and will be only briefly mentioned here. 

In LACCC mode a polymer elutes independently of its molar mass according to its chemical heterogeneity, e.p. end groups. This particular mode is nearly exclusively applied in the 1° dimension of the 2D chromatography. By means of a switching valve fractions are taken and transferred into the 2™ dimension, which is SEC. Using commercially available software (WINGPC™: Polymer Standard Service, Mainz, Germany) 2D plots can be created showing molar mass versus end group distribution. The analysis of copolymers can also be performed without this often Lime-consuming combination of methods." First the ‘critical’ conditions of separation of one polymer unit have to be ascertained.At these condita separat **i** on onsaccording to the mass of the second polymer unit must be achieved. The same procedure, ie. separation al ‘critical’ conditions, has also to be performed for the second polymer unil. After 

*Correspondence to: S. M. Weidner, Federal Institute for Materials Research and Testing (BAM), Dept I ‘Analytical Chemistry, Reference Materials’, Richard-Willstacticr-Strasse 11, 1-12489 Berlin, Germany. E-mail: stefien. weidner@bam.de 

calibration of SEC for both units the molar mass and molar mass distribution (MMD) of the copolymer unils can be obtained within a certain mass range, which is different for various polymer systems. Anjéxample for ayPEO-a-PPo mono-n-butyl ether polymer is shownin Figs. 1(a)—-1(d). Hence, one has to ascertain ‘critical’ conditions of adsorption for each single copolymer structure and, simultaneously, to ensure a separation according to molar mass for the corresponding second polymer unit. This cannotbe achieved for all copolymers. Sometimes, at ‘critical’ conditions for the first unil, the second unit elutes in adsorption mode, and a SEC separation cannot be obtained. Furthermore, especially al higher masses, the solubility of ome structural unit at ‘critical’ conditions of the other is limited, which results in precipitation al the top of the separation columns. Furthermore, the separation al ‘critical’ conditions of adsorption is achieved in most cases using binary (or ternary) solvent mixtures, which might contain sall to avoid aggregation. Thus, the transfer of fractions from LACCC mode to SEC mode can lead to strong additional signals in the size exclusion chromatograms. In conjunction with a drastically lower polymer concentration in the second dimension due to fractionation (up to 1M) single fractions) of the original amount of sample, clear peak detection cannot always be assured. Another important drawback is the lack of 

cc WILEY SA) InterScience’ > Gecv **o** ntvin ered erat 

Copyright ¢) 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd- 

**==> picture [446 x 272] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
A novel software tool for copolymer characterization 2751<br>TGatlas pales al um aan fer a Soe<br>sa<br>1004 (a) Feoae77 a von PromPRO Sac| i ‘okie! peinl at 7.54 min{b)for<br>——PEO 4200 aon l| tt ----- PEG. 9g<br>> aoe he A = I | | | — PED A1Z0<br>BTS =e PEO<br>2 ERO:1 feeae Py =Fie He| | k||<br>a borg pay: bey = iar |<br>o:aF<br>66 ? a a © 4 4% 5 & 7 a | ee<br>Ratention time {min} Retention time (min)<br>cn (e) ; 1a . (d)<br>\ ei ‘\<br>—=" =a<br>i074 + - i 7<br>5 é ba 8 5 6 7 a s wm 1 4B<br>Retention time (min) Ratention time {min}<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure 1. Elution of PEO and PPO standards at ‘critical’ conditions of the second unit (a: AP system, C18 phase, THF/H;0 solvent mixture; b: NP system, NH, phase, THF/ methanol/n-hexane solvent mixture) and resulting calibration curves (c, d), used for the determination of molar masses and mass distributions of PEQ-co-PPO polymers. 

standards for calibrating the SEC. For this reason a matrix mixture as well as structure-dependent ionization completely different approach was recently presented. The probabilities in MALDI-TOF M5, the signal intensity chromatographic separation in LACCC was shifted to LAC information provided by MALDI-TOF spectra cannot be (near ‘critical’, LAC,.,,CC) mode.* This resulted in a used (see Fig. 2). Therefore, after baseline subtraction, each broadening of peaks due to increased interactions of polymer MALDI spectrum was normalized in a second step to an molecules with the stationary phase. However, these absolute intensity of 100%. Por the construction of 2D plots separation conditions have to be very carefully adjusted, because the risk of precipitation of molecules always exists. Simultaneously, the second chromatographic dimension - (SEC) was replaced by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ _..---- ELSD ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry mass speclromme Pal —— Tie etry (MALDI-TOF MS). For MALDI coupling, fractions taken ¢ ‘ from LAC).C were transferred by means ofa spray device = : \ onto the MALDI sample target. ® bie i ; Using the new MassChrom2D software tool the copolymer ww é f t Y composition of each fraction can be calculated from mass sy aap \ | e spectra. This software was developed to replace the = ; hee inconvenient and time-consuming calculation procedure = pede yr previously performed in Microsoft Excel”. The practicability 43 t Fed ial i" | of the chosen mathematical procedure for the analysis of et % copolyesters was presented recently."” The procedure is 2 sneer imne ahaa “ er based on the assignment of observed masses by MALDI-TOF 6 g 10 42 14 16 MS to calculated masses in a matrix formed by both Retention time (min) monomer units, normalization and subsequent correction by chromatographic intensity information. Depending on the Figure 2. Evaporative light scattering detector (ELSD) signal peak resolution in MALDI-TOF M5, which can be signifiof a LACyea CC chromatogram of a PEO-co-PPO polymer cantly improved bya previous chromatographic separation, and total ion current (TIC) of a series of 667 MALDI mass copolymers with masses up to m/z 11000 could be spectra (each sum of 200 shots) of the copolymer after spray investigated. Due to inhomogeneities in the solid sample/ deposition onto the MALDI target. 

Kamd Commun. Mass Spectrom. 2007; 21: 2750-2758 DOE 101002 rem 

Copyright a 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Lid. 

2752 5. M. Weidner et al. 

**==> picture [389 x 710] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
a5<br>pate _ tetenagen | Oe| Grenitantiecoen | ter [IC =} ve]<br>a |<br>Pet Pe Lal !<br>iP tn ach _paarag i emetthan hor aati<br>‘jl ——— i ; FE Coe a 3<br>s} a |<br>Caines Tere ID | eo<br>Figure 3. Graphic user interface of the ‘MassChromeD’ software.<br>2000<br>| +55<br>+<br>1500 | |<br>@Z 1000 i || | | | |<br>=g ANNMH MA)| | | eAialWat Ia‘alMhTWHii ahll, fd<br>500 "|| | | 1140 1160 1180 1200<br>1 I | ,<br>My ry<br>o die situ ill mm i ed iid i dl tt ae<br>500 1000 1500 ™ 2000 2500 3000<br>miz<br>Figure 4. MALDI-TOF mass spectrum of a PEO-co-PPO polymer before<br>separation and fractionation in gradient chromatography<br>exclusively gained from chroma- 20<br>this principle cannot be directly 0 prrtotttes 70<br>approaches of copolymer charac- f is<br>18 if | z<br>ethers of polyethylene oxide- a 17 FA A 5<br>(PEQ-co-PPO) were inves- inves- if J i 2<br>7 S 16 F ; | 4 5<br>andcopolymerssurfactants.iscopolymerssurfactants.issurfactants.isis widelyDueDue to usedthethe poorforfor 2e 15 ri P / | os8<br>in the lower mass region these the lower mass region these lower mass region these mass region these region these these = - Pi Ni - =<br>to be checked be checked checked by the new new at | V | |<br>? 55<br>1312 ae, Wo. 400<br>o 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 416<br>Retention time [min]<br>Figure 5. Gradient chromatography of a PEO-co-PPO poly-<br>of the program the program program is shown shown in Fig. 3. mer (arrows indicate retention times where MALDI-TOF mass<br>of copolymer copolymer composition molar spectra were recorded; dashed line corresponds to the<br> as well as end end groups and added and added added amount of isopropanol).<br>& Soms, Ltd. Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 20007; 21: 2750-2758<br>DOL: 10.1002/rem<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


intensity information was exclusively gained from chromatography. Therefore, this principle cannot be directly compared with other 2D approaches of copolymer characterization.''"* Various mono-n-butyl ethers of polyethylene oxidepolypropylene oxide copolymers (PEQ-co-PPO) were inves- investigated. : 7 S lubricants,Thisemulsifiersclass of andcopolymerssurfactants.iscopolymerssurfactants.issurfactants.isis widelyDueDue to usedthethe poorforfor mass resolution of the method in the lower mass region these the lower mass region these lower mass region these mass region these region these these seemed lo be ideal substances to be checked be checked checked by the new new approach. 

## EXPERIMENTAL 

## ‘MassChrom2D" software 

The graphic user interface of the program the program program is shown shown in Fig. 3. For an accurate calculation of copolymer copolymer composition molar masses of copolymer units as well as end end groups and added and added added Copyright @ 2007 John Wiley & Soms, Ltd. 

A novel software tool for copolymer characterization 2753 

**==> picture [428 x 542] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
20<br>1.0<br>os (5)<br>8)<br>2<br>= Oe =<br>@ oO 10-<br>2w<br>=ou ><br>n2 | : 2)<br>| |<br>Wil |<br>oo o<br>400 a0 ct] 1000 1200 Tan o § 10 15 20<br>ave No of PO units<br>to 20<br>oe | - - )7<br>5|<br>=Oo 10<br>as rs<br>2 |<br>02 5<br>ao 0<br>go No of PO units<br>20<br>10<br>oe (9)<br>is) 15<br>2<br>= bre 5<br>5=a n4 g5 10<br>a ‘.<br>' z 5!<br>02<br>| |<br>DD 0+<br>aon 600 p00 1000 1200 1200 o § 10 15 20<br>ne No of PO units<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure 6. MALDI-TOF mass spectra (left) and corresponding 2D composition plots (right) of fractions 5, 7 and 9 recorded afler separation in gradient chromatography. 

salts for calionization are essential. Finally, the chromatogram and single MALDI-TOF mass spectra of all fractions have to be imported in ASCII format. Afler assignment of the start and end points of the fractionation, depending on the number of spectra, the average intensity shown in marked slices is used for the calculation of the intensity of single 2D 

Copyright a 2077 John Wiley é&& Sons, Lid. 

plots. The final 2D plot is composed of the sum of single 2D plots. 

Liquid adsorption chromatography (LAC) A Hewlett Packard HP 1090 liquid chromatograph (Palo Alto, CA, USA) was used for chromatographic separation. 

Repu Commun. Mass Spectrom. S07; 21. 2730-2758 DOM: T1002 nem 

**==> picture [479 x 493] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
27054 5. M. Weidner et al.<br>4000<br>. 3000 UW |WW| WW \ Me<br>2 2000 a<br>?<br>1000<br>vt]<br>1000 2000 3000 4000 5000<br>miz<br>Figure 7. MALDI-TOF mass spectrum of a PEO-co-PPO polymer before<br>separation and fractionation in isocratic mode.<br>For detection an evaporative detection an evaporative an evaporative evaporative light scattering detector (ELSD) detector (ELSD) (ELSD) 5<br>SEDEX 45 (Gedere, Alfortville, France) was employed. The<br>of 45°C. The eluent flow was 0.5mL/min. The injected<br>chromatographic system was was kept ala constant temperature ala constant temperature constant temperature temperature 4 I)<br>volume was 20iL. The was 20iL. The 20iL. The The sample concentration concentration ofPEO-co-PPOPEO-co-PPO 23 | |<br>mono-n-bulylIn isocratic mode ether polymers two YMC was RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL.In isocratic mode ether polymers two YMC was RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. isocratic mode ether polymers two YMC was RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. mode ether polymers two YMC was RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. ether polymers two YMC was RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. polymers two YMC was RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. two YMC was RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. YMC was RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. was RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. 18 columns (300Amg/mL. columns (300Amg/mL.mg/mL.  with &a |/mn|<br>Spm pore size, 250+ 125mm length and 4.6mm id.) were pore size, 250+ 125mm length and 4.6mm id.) were size, 250+ 125mm length and 4.6mm id.) were 250+ 125mm length and 4.6mm id.) were 125mm length and 4.6mm id.) were length and 4.6mm id.) were and 4.6mm id.) were 4.6mm id.) were id.) were were = 2 i (<br>used for separation. The solvent composition separation. The solvent composition The solvent composition solvent composition composition of 85:15v/v 85:15v/v | |<br>mode for the separation separation of PPO, PPO, was changed changed to 65:35v/'v i af<br>tetrahydrofuran (THF)/ water, which represents the ‘critical’ (THF)/ water, which represents the ‘critical’ water, which represents the ‘critical’ which represents the ‘critical’ represents the ‘critical’ the ‘critical’ ‘critical’ 1 | | |<br>ratio.<br>In gradient mode ‘critical’ conditions of separation separation of PEO PEO 0 ete0 5 at10 15 20<br>(Hehtywemethanel/ water) were initially adjusted. These Retention time [min]<br>conditions were shifted into LAC mode by adding adding a third,<br>thermodynamically poor solvent (isopropanol. Figure 8 Chromatography (isocratic) of a PEO-coPPO<br>polymer (arrows indicate retention times where MALDI-TOF<br>mass spectra were recorded).<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


For detection an evaporative detection an evaporative an evaporative evaporative light scattering detector (ELSD) detector (ELSD) (ELSD) SEDEX 45 (Gedere, Alfortville, France) was employed. The of 45°C. The eluent flow was 0.5mL/min. The injected chromatographic system was was kept ala constant temperature ala constant temperature constant temperature temperature volume was 20iL. The was 20iL. The 20iL. The The sample concentration concentration ofPEO-co-PPOPEO-co-PPO mono-n-bulylIn isocratic mode ether polymers two YMC was RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL.In isocratic mode ether polymers two YMC was RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. isocratic mode ether polymers two YMC was RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. mode ether polymers two YMC was RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. ether polymers two YMC was RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. polymers two YMC was RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. two YMC was RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. YMC was RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. was RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. RP 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. 2-3 18 columns (300Amg/mL. 18 columns (300Amg/mL. columns (300Amg/mL.mg/mL. with Spm pore size, 250+ 125mm length and 4.6mm id.) were pore size, 250+ 125mm length and 4.6mm id.) were size, 250+ 125mm length and 4.6mm id.) were 250+ 125mm length and 4.6mm id.) were 125mm length and 4.6mm id.) were length and 4.6mm id.) were and 4.6mm id.) were 4.6mm id.) were id.) were were used for separation. The solvent composition separation. The solvent composition The solvent composition solvent composition composition of 85:15v/v 85:15v/v mode for the separation separation of PPO, PPO, was changed changed to 65:35v/'v tetrahydrofuran (THF)/ water, which represents the ‘critical’ (THF)/ water, which represents the ‘critical’ water, which represents the ‘critical’ which represents the ‘critical’ represents the ‘critical’ the ‘critical’ ‘critical’ ratio. In gradient mode ‘critical’ conditions of separation separation of PEO PEO (Hehtywemethanel/ water) were initially adjusted. These conditions were shifted into LAC mode by adding adding a third, thermodynamically poor solvent (isopropanol. 

## MALDI-TOF MS 

A REFLEX I MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik, Bremen, Germany) operating in reflectron mode at 20kV was used. Matrix and polymers were sprayed separately on the MALDI larget by means of a LC 500 spray interface (LabConnections, Carrboro, NC, USA). ftrans-3(3-(4-fert-Butylpheny!)-2-methyl-2-propenylidene})malononitrile (DCTB) has been shown to bea suitable matrix for PEO and PPO. Therefore, for matrix preparation a 3mg,/mL solution of DCTB (Fluka, Seelze, Germany) and 1 mmol /mL. sodium trifluoroacetate (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) in THF (Sigma-Aldrich, Buchs, Switzerland) was sprayed at a temperature of 120°C at a flow rate of 1mL,min, simultaneously applying a 20 L/min N> stream. After the MALDI target had been pre-coated with matrix the chromatographic run was deposited onto the largel. Due to the use of water in the eluent mixtures, polymer samples were sprayed al 

Copyright « 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

> higher temperatures(160-220°C). The N> flow rate was again 20 L/min. 

Tandem mass spectrometric (M5/M5) frapmentation experiments were performed by means of an Autoflex Til TOF/TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik) equipped wilh a pridless delayed extraction ion source, precursor ion selector, collision cell, cell for product ton post-acceleration (so-called LIFT cell), and gridless ion reflector. A frequencytripled modulated, diode pumped Nd:YAG laser (SmartBeam; Bruker) working alt 355 nm was used for the MALDI process.'7 lons were accelerated in a high-vollage field of 6kV from the ion source. Fragmentation was carried out using argon as collision gas. The pressure in the collision cell was adjusted to 5x10 "mbar. Formed product ions were accelerated al 19KV in the LIFT cell 

Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 20877; 21: 27-2758 DOM: 10.1002,/rem 

**==> picture [436 x 495] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
A novel software tool for copolymer characterization 2755<br>50<br>i (8)8)<br>6000<br>\ 2 w<br>| :<br>400 aan 5<br>| a 20 “ .<br>| | g oa<br>2000 | | | i<br>HHI HI lw<br>500 1000 1600 000 2500 3000 3500 0 10 20 30 40 50<br>ox No of PO units<br>50<br>DOG«=<br>. (10)<br>15000 2 30<br>a<br>1on00 | | | iwo<br>| 5 20<br>iy o i=<br>so00 | = 40 ’." #i:<br>IIH | é<br>® 0<br>S00 1006 1500 2000 2500 30a 2500 o 40 1] 30 40 50<br>me No of PO units<br>50<br>0nd ‘<br>ia (12)<br>20000 - | 2= 30<br>a<br>||| ‘5 20<br>10000 - | iI | z=9 10 ,i é<br>iBRAT| 1 | ‘| Way| | Fr<br>o 0 '<br>Sh 1000 1600 2000 z600 Jong 7600 0 10 20 30 40 50<br>- No of PO units<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure 9. MALDI-TOF mass spectra (left) and corresponding 2D composition plots (right) of fractions 8, 10 and 12 recorded after separation in isocratic chromatography 

## RESULTS 

The MALDI-TOF mass spectrum of a non-fractionated PEO-PPO copolymer is shown in Fig. 4. The enlargement of the mass spectrum clearly illustrates one major problem of copolymer characterization using MALDI-TOF MS. The spectrum is characterized by a series with typical peaklo-peak distances of 44 (EO units) and 58 (PO units) m/z units. The overlapping of these peak series inevilably causes peak-to-peak distances of 2 m/z units. The resulting peak clusters consist of multiple distributions of carbon isolopes overlaying each other. These peaks can only be separated 

Copyright oS 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

from each other by means of chromatography. A separation at ‘critical’ conditions would lead to narrow peaks eluting from the column. Therefore, conditions for a separation al ‘critical’ conditions of adsorption were changed into near ‘critical’ conditions either by an isocratic alteration of the solvent composition or by applying a gradient mode. Due lo increasing interactions of dissolved molecules and the slalionary phase much broader chromatograms were observed. These chromatograms offer better resolution and could be used for a subsequent fractionation by means of the spray device. Figure 5 shows the chromatogram of a lower mass PEO-co-PPO mono-n-butyl ether polymer alter 

Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 2007; 21: 2750-2758 DO: 10.1002/rem 

2756 5S. M. Weidner et al. 

**==> picture [367 x 163] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
20 50<br>(a) Fr (b)<br>2<br>3<br>5<br>2 é ™ &.<br>i)<br>x) a fF<br>- 0 a0 f.<br>0 oO ~<br>o 5 10 45 20 o 10 20 w 40 5<br>No of PO units No of PO units<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure 10. Sum 2D plots of two different PEQ-co-PPO polymers (each composed of 14 single 2D plots). 

gradient chromatography siarting al ‘critical’ separation conditions for PEO. The chromatographic run between & to 13min was sprayed onto the MALDI-TOF target and 14 MALDIT mass spectra were recorded continuously. By means of three selected mass spectra, attributed to fractions 5, 7 and 9, very good peak resolution after fractionation can be demonstrated (see Fig. 6). In fractions 5 and 7 only bwo mass distributions, both representing series with peakto-peak differences of 44 m/z units, can be seen. In fraction 9 a third distribution withamaximum atm/z 1100 is visible bul even in this fraction the carbon isotope patterns of different series are clearly separated from each other. This enabled a clear assignment of masses lo copolymer compositions by means of the ‘MassChrom21’ software. The resulting 2D plots of fractions 5, 7 and 9 are also shown in Fig. 6. These plots indicate a shift of the copolymer composition during fractionation that seems to be only little affected by the number of EQ) units, whereas the number of PO units simultaneously increases from 3 and 4 in fraction 5 to 5 and fin fraction §. They clearly reveal that PEO units still chute in a ‘critical’ mode of adsorption, while PPO elutes in a typical LAC mode. 

A completely different behaviour can be found for a PEO-PPO copolymer with an average molar mass of 2100. The mass resolution, shown in the MALDI-TOF mass spectrum of the original sample (Fig. 7), is very poor but, after fractionation in LAC mode using an isocratic solvent mixture (Fig. 8), the MALDI-TOF mass spectra of fractions 5, 7 and 9 (see Fig. 9) exhibit well-resolved peaks again. However, the progression of 21D plots, also shown in Fig. 9, reveals an astonishing separation mechanism in the chromatographic system. While the number of EO unils decreases with increasing retention time, the number of PO units increases. This indicates a parallel separation of PEO in SEC mode and PPO in LAC mode. 

The sum 2D plots of both polymers are shown in Fig. 10. Each sum plot consists of 14 single fractions plots, which were corrected for chromatographic intensities at the corresponding retention times. A comparison clearly indicates differences due to different separation modes in chromatography. Nevertheless, both 2D plots reflect the overall 

copolymer composition, which is independent of the chromatographic separation. 

Due to the generally lower mass accuracy of MALDI-TOF MS compared with that of other MS methods (e.g. electrospray ionization TOF), some ions in the spectrum (Fig. 10(b)) could not be unequivocally attributed to certain copolymer compositions. An ion al m/z 2216.5 can be theoretically attributed to a copolymer either with EQsPOks (m/z 2216.59) or EQO,,PO),, (m/z 2216.41). For this reason some additional spols in the 2D plot representing regions of so-called isohars were obtained. A differentiation between these isobaric structures was performed by MS/MS fragmentation analysis. The corresponding MALDI-M5/MS5 mass spectrum for a precursor ion al m/z 2216.41, seen in Fig. 11, showsa fragmentation pattern typical for block copolymers. Chain fragments consisting of more than 15 EO and 12 PO units could be determined. This result can onlybe explained by a fragmentation ofa block-like BO4;POQ;; copolymer and excludes the formation of BO.PO4.. 

A mapping of isobars within the 21D composition plots can only be avoided by better mass resolution combined with excellent calibration of the mass spectrometer. 

## CONCHSION: 

The composition of various PEQ-co-PPO mono-butyl ether polymers was determined using coupled chromatographic and mass spectrometric Lechniques. The need for a previous chromatographic separation, which is essential for high resolution in mass spectrometry, has been shown. Using the ‘MassChrom2D" software the copolymer composition can be visualized in 2D plots, which can be used as fast fingerprint identification. The software allows us to detect changes in molar mass and mass distribution as a resull of changing manufacturing conditions or aging processes. A general change of the copolymer composition can be easily monitored. In addition, the character of the separation of each copolymer unil in various chromatographic systems can be easily detected and evaluated. This would allow adapting the conditions of copolymer separation to the most useful chromatographic parameters. 

Copyright «> 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Lod. 

Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 20N17; 21: 2730-2758 LOM: 10.1002, om 

A novel software tool for copolymer characterization 2757 

**==> picture [366 x 634] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
3 e000<br>iy =]<br>¢z<br>2sod 7<br>w<br>Fae |<br>— if)<br>+ iF S 2 2<br>Witw«<br>bal will alt? B SS a5,<br>70c0 r vg tsi lity!Ff FeeagsMe he Le 7 3 ~a $29Soo Bk F '<br>I Hog) EA ; Ah) 4 il! i i ar a4 é Ld 2 ou bh<br>] 1 aN Ch Th me iia 2 a 8<br>1000 } } On Hat i |i ala I iT<br>| | | | Wa!Wi Mt| ! wilHi eit, wh<br>250 S00 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000<br>miz<br>3000<br>J,EO. EO. EO. FO EO .FO res Oboe EO LEO, EO 10 E OVO a<br>> 2000 4+: a ¢ 5 fhe& Ee Hdto fof2oboez Ob :GE iEgE<br>= : : ' Be : i<br>& \ \ : : . H<br>rd i i '<br>& i<br>3<br>= 1000<br>AAA AAAI RT<br>1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700 1800<br>3000 male<br>4 PO. PO. PO; PO PO, PO PO, PO. PO, PO,<br>2000 4 |: ae _ ef : ;<br>cS a eT oe<br>a<br>8<br>=1000<br>1000 1100 1200 1300 1400 1500 1600 1700<br>miz<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


Figure 11. MALDI-TOF MS/MS spectrum recorded for a precursor ion at m/z 2216.4 of a PEO-co-PPO polymer after chromatographic separation (top) and sections showing EO (middle) and PO distributions (bottom). 

Copyright a) 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 

Rapid Contaun. Mass Spectrom. 207; 21: 270-2758 DOL 10.1002/ Trem 

2758 S. M. Weidner ef al. 

Acknowledgements The authors like to thank B. Manger for her practical work and M. Resch (Shimadzu Europe GmbH) for recording the TIC data. 

## BERENSi 

1. Paseh H, Trathnige B. HPLC of Polymers. Springer: Berlin ?. GorskovSapeoimlags AV,1998. Jevreinov VV, Lausecker B, Pasch H, Becker H, Wagner CG. Acta Polymerica 1986; 37: 740. 

3. Pasch H, Brinkmann C,Much H, Just U. |. Chromatogr. A 1902; 623: 315. 

4. Falkenhagen J, Friedrich JF, Schulz G, Krucger KP, Much H, Weidner 5. Int. |. Polym. Anal. Charact. 2000; &: 549. 

Copyright « 2007 John Wiley & Somes, Ltd_ 

5. Kilz P, Krueger RP, Much H, Schulz G. ACS Adv. Chem. ‘ ane Sas ee ee ee i ers a ee Ee Bake Sy eae ee 

7. Bicla T, Duda A, Kode K, Paseh H. Polymer 2003; 44: 1851. 

& Kruger RP, Much H, Schulz G, Wachsen O. Macromol. Samp. 1996; 110: 155. 

9. Macromol.Siewing A,Chem.SchierholzPhys. 2001;J, Braun 202: 2890.D, Hellman G, Pasch H. 

10. Weidner 5, Falkenhagen J, Krueger RP, Just U. Amel. Cher. 11. 20M;Wileezk-Vera79: 4814. G, Danis PO, Eisenberg A. Macrotolecules 1906; 20: 4036. 

12. Wileezk-Vera G, Yu Y, Waddell K, Danis PO, Eisenberg A. Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 1999; 13: 764. 

13. Holle A, Haase A, Kayser M, Hohndorl J. |. Mass Spectrom. 2006; 4: 705. 

Kapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 2007; 3: 2750-2758 BOE 10.1002/ rem 

