## **Rapid #: -22733216** 

CROSS REF ID: **496491** LENDER: **GZM (Univ. of Wisconsin, Madison) :: EJournals** BORROWER: **TMA (University of Memphis, University Libraries - TMA) :: Main Library** 

TYPE: Article CC:CCL JOURNAL TITLE: Die makromolekulare Chemie USER JOURNAL TITLE: Die Makromolekulare Chemie ARTICLE TITLE: Chromatographic investigations of macromolecules in the critical range of liquid chromatography, 5. Characterization of block copolymers of decyl and methyl methacrylate ARTICLE AUTHOR: Pasch H, Augenstein M VOLUME: 194 ISSUE: 9 MONTH: YEAR: 1993 PAGES: 2533ISSN: 0025-116X OCLC #: 

Processed by RapidX: 6/19/2024 12:25:38 PM 

This material may be protected by copyright law (Title 17 U.S. Code) 

Makromol. Chem. 194, 2533 — 2541 (1993) 

2533 

## Chromatographic investigations of macromolecules in the critical range of liquid chromatography, 5) 

## Characterization of block copolymers of decyl and methyl methacrylate 

## Harald Pasch* 

Deutsches Kunststoff-Institut, SchloBgartenstr. 6, 64289 Darmstadt, Germany 

## Michael Augenstein 

R6hm GmbH Chemische Fabrik, Kirschenallee, 64293 Darmstadt, Germany 

(Received: November 5, 1992; revised manuscript of January 19, 1993) 

## SUMMARY: 

Block copolymers of decyl and methyl methacrylate were analyzed by liquid chromatography at the critical point of adsorption. The molar mass and the polydispersity of the decyl methacrylate block was determined using chromatographic conditions resulting in a critical mode for poly(methyl methacrylate). In addition, using the same column system, the total molar mass and polydispersity of the block copolymers were determined, operating at chromatographic conditions insuring a size exclusion mechanism for both components. 

## Introduction 

The development and application of new polymeric materials with a complex structure and taylor-made properties has created new, demanding tasks for polymer analysis. As for copolymers, the determination of the molar mass distribution is not sufficient for a complete analysis because the distribution in chemical composition has to be considered as well. 

Gradient elution or precipitation chromatography has been shown to be a very useful technique for the determination of the chemical heterogeneity of copolymers '~). Chromatographic cross-fractionation, i.e. the combination of two different chromatographic techniques, is able to give detailed information on the molar mass distribution and the chemical heterogeneity*~*). 

Another more recent approach to the characterization of heteropolymers is the concept of “invisibility’’, which assumes that chromatographic conditions exist under which heteropolymers may be separated according to the size of one of the components, because the other component is chromatographically “invisible”*”, This concept experimentally relates to liquid chromatography at the critical point of adsorption, which was developed by Entelis, Evreinov and Gorshkov as a method for 

4) Part 4: H. Pasch, C. Brinkmann, Y. Gallot, Polymer, in press. 

© 1993, Hiithig & Wepf Verlag, Basel 

CCC 0025-116X/93/$05.00 

