## Chromatographic investigations of macromolecules in the critical range of liquid chromatography: 4. Analysis of poly(styrene-b-methyl methacrylate) H. Pasch* and C. Brinkmann 

Deutsches Kunststoff-Institut, Schlossgartenstrasse 6, 6100 Darmstadt, Germany 

## and Y. Gallot 

Institute Charles Sadron, 6 rue Boussingault, 67083 Strasbourg Cedex, France (Received 24 September 1992) 

Poly(styrene-b-methyl methacrylate)s were analysed by liquid chromatography at the critical point of adsorption. By operating at chromatographic conditions corresponding to the critical mode for poly(methyl methacrylate) and the size exclusion mode for polystyrene, the molar mass and the polydispersity of the polystyrene block in the block copolymers may be determined. The data were found to be in excellent agreement with the corresponding parameters of the polystyrene precursor homopolymers. 

(Keywords: liquid chromatography; critical point of adsorption; poly(styrene-b-methyl methacrylate); analysis) 

INTRODUCTION by the entropy losses. Corresponding to these three Block copolymers are complex macromolecular systems cases are the three modes of chromatography of that are characterized by distributions in molar macromolecules: adsorption, exclusion and critical At mass (MMD) and chemical composition (CCD). The the critical point AG is zero and Ky=1 regardless[of][the] determination of the MMD and CCD is possible molar mass. Accordingly, the chain length of the using chromatographic cross-fractionation, where two macromolecule does re contribute to retention, and different chromatographic techniques are combined. One rn ion hepa ie “he on be: in a tye of fae 4 i of these (usually s.e.c.) provides information on the MMD polymer ¢ fin, 1. blocks at and type of tlunciiona whereas the other (gradient elution or precipitation at gra ‘we “ee oc ae c. d oth thors?!° chromatography) is sensitive towards the CCD!. h the 4 8 ‘ibilit »y us t an i er lied to th Another more recent approach is the concept of that the ‘Invisibility Concept can be applied to the ‘invisibility’, which assumes that chromatographic characterization of block copolymers. ror examp conditions exist under which heteropolymers can be taking 4 block copolymer ABms the : enhomagensit ¢ separated according to the size of one of the components Ther fo as a the oxitic Conlitio m f B f r the only, because the second component is chromatographically hron ore, he e ‘ration A vay b ° naly “d nd ‘invisible’?>. The ‘invisibility’ concept experimentally chromatographic separation, A, may De analysed a relates to liquid chromatography at the critical point of The subj f th is th Isis of adsorption, which was developed by Entelis et al. as a € subject of the present paper Is the analysis © Ptypemethoddistagutionearieanefor the determination(FTD) of telechelicof ‘theoligomersfunctionality-‘ and (PMMA)brockperatingcopo attheymth MMD **e** rs.critical of horeneofpointthe polystyreneof andpoly(methyl treet(PS)Wmethacrstatemethacrylateblock will In brief ‘for every chromatographic process, the be determined and compared with the characteristics of distribution of a solute between the stationary and mobile the corresponding PS precursor homopolymers. phases is related to the change in free energy AG. AG depends on the solute/macromolecule size, the pore size EXPERIMENTAL of the stationary phase and the energy of interaction, (x), _— . : ; of the monomer unit and the segment of the stationary Liquid chromatography at the critical point of adsorption phase surface. Starting with a critical potential of was carried out on a modular h.p.Lc. system, comprising interaction, ¢,, adsorption of the macromolecule takes a Waters model 510 pump, a Waters differential RJ place in the pore (¢><,). detector R401, a Knauer u.v./vis. filter photometer, a At e<e, the macromolecule remains unadsorbed and Rheodyne six-port injection valve and a Waters column at e=e, the interaction energy is exactly compensated oven. The columns used were either a Macherey-Nagel a Nucleosil"Si-100, Syzm average particle size, 200* 4mm *To whom correspondence should be addressed id., prepacked column or Merck LiChrospher Si-300 and 

*To whom correspondence should be addressed 0032~3861/93/194100-05 © 1993 Butterworth-Heinemann Ltd. 4100 POLYMER, 1993, Volume 34, Number 19 

The critical range of liquid chromatography. 4: H. Pasch et al. 

Si=1000, 10%7m average particle size, 200x4mm""1d., molar-mass dependence of the retention time disappears. self-packed columns. The behaviour of poly(methy!l methacrylate)s of different The s.e.c. investigations were performed on a Waters molar masses on silica gel in mixtures of methyl ethyl modular s.e.c. system using six 300 x 8mm id. Waters ketone (MEK) and cyclohexane is shown in Figure 7: Ultrastyragel columns (10°, 2 x x 105, 2 x 104, 103 A) and At concentrations > 73 vol% MEK in the mixture, the tetrahydrofuran (THF) as the mobile phase. retention time increases with decreasing molar mass All solvents were Baker h.p.l.c. grade. and, therefore, the size exclusion mode is operating. The poly(styrene-b-methyl methacrylate)s were prepared Adsorption takes place at concentrations <73 vol% by anionic polymerization. Copolymers B1-B3 were MEK where the reverse molar mass vs. retention time prepared first by polymerizing styrene in THF at low behaviour is observed. The critical point of PMMA is temperature(—(— 70°C) using phenylisopropylpotassium as using phenylisopropylpotassium as phenylisopropylpotassium as as obtained at a composition of 73 vol% MEK/27 vol% initiator. In order to avoid the attack of the ester group cyclohexane. At this point one retention time is obtained of methyl methyl methacrylate (MMA) (MMA) by polystyryl polystyryl carbanions, for all molar masses of PMMA. Accordingly, using 1,1-diphenylethylene was introduced prior to the addition was introduced prior to the addition introduced prior to the addition prior to the addition to the addition the addition addition these chromatographic conditions, block copolymers of MMA to decrease the nucleophilicity of the active containing PMMA as one block component may be sites. Samples B4 and BS were prepared by butyllithiumanalysed with respect to the second block component. initiated polymerization of styrene and subsequent Figure 2 shows the size exclusion chromatograms addition of methyl methacrylate. (s.e.c. 1, Ultrastyragel, THF) of three poly(styrene-bmethyl methacrylate)s and the corresponding polystyrene RESULTS precursors. As was expected for anionic polymerization, AND DISCUSSION the MMD is very narrow. The total molar mass of Principally there are two ways to determine the MMD the block copolymers (calculated using a polystyrene of one block component in a two-block copolymer A,B,,,: calibration curve) is of the magnitude of about 180000, (i) Using the critical conditions of block A for whereas the polystyrene content varies between 30 and the chromatography, block B may be analysed. The 70 wt% (see Table 1). In addition, two block copolymers distribution coefficient of the block copolymer in this with lower total molar masses (150000 and 20000) and case corresponds to the distribution coefficient of block B: a polystyrene content of about 50 wt% were investigated. e=(e,) KAB= KB Compared to the molar-mass data given by the Ale d d manufacturer, the obtained data on s.e.c. 1 are somewhat (ii) At the critical conditions of block B, block A may lower. However, s.e.c. data obtained on a second system be analysed, and K, of the block copolymer corresponds (s.e.c. 2, silica gel, MEK) are in good agreement with to K, of block A: s.e.c. 1. The reason for this mismatch is the quantification &=(ép),= KyAB_=K;jKA of the; chromatograms.. The manufacturer’s: : data were Depending obtained by s.e.c.light scattering detection, whereas block on the polarity of the blocks A and B, the quantification of s.e.c. 1 and s.e.c. 2 was based on a to be analysed may be eluted in a size exclusion polystyrene calibration curve and RJ and u.v. detection. or adsorption mode at the critical conditions of the other The chromatograms of the block copolymer B3 at the block. Thus, if the polarity of A is higher than that of B, critical point of PMMA together with those of the elutedthen at the critical point of A the block copolymer is corresponding precursor P3 and apolystyrene calibration the in a size exclusion mode when silica gel is used as standard of comparable molar mass are given in stationary phase. In the case of a reversed-phase Figure 3. As can be seen, all three chromatograms have column, an adsorption mode would be operating. similar shapes and retention ranges. In contrast to s.e.c., However, as in adsorption chromatography the distribution coefficient depends exponentially on the molar mass, irreversible adsorption could occur for high-molar-mass components. Therefore, in most cases it is useful to select 3 chromatographic conditions corresponding to the size logM Vol “te MEK exclusion mode. The poly(styrene-b-methyl methacrylate)s under inves78 a 7 tigation were prepared by phenylisopropylpotassium5 (B1-B3) or butyllithium- (B4, B5) initiated polymerization ofstyrene and subsequent addition of methyl methacrylate: 100 70 The polystyrene“ precursors (P1—P3) were isolated and characterized separately: It may be assumed that the polystyrene molar mass and polydispersity do not change ‘ during the formation of the diblock copolymer, and lo 60 therefore these parameters must be equal for the precursor and the polystyrene block in the block ° copolymer. In order to prove the validity of the ‘invisibility’ concept for the determination of single blocks in diblock copolymers, the poly(styrene-b-methy| 3 methacrylate)s are investigated at the critical conditions of poly(methyl methacrylate). It was demonstrated in previous investigations that the 0 200 280 300 RT (see } criticalstationarypointphasemayandbevaryingobtainedthe bymobileselectingphaseauntilcertainthe methacrylate);Figure1 Critical NucleosildiagramSi-100,of logMEK-cyclohexane,M vs. retentionflowtime rateof 0.5 poly(methyl ml min? 

The s.e.c. investigations were performed on a Waters modular s.e.c. system using six 300 x 8mm id. Waters Ultrastyragel columns (10°, 2 x x 105, 2 x 104, 103 A) and tetrahydrofuran (THF) as the mobile phase. All solvents were Baker h.p.l.c. grade. The poly(styrene-b-methyl methacrylate)s were prepared by anionic polymerization. Copolymers B1-B3 were prepared first by polymerizing styrene in THF at low temperature(—(— 70°C) using phenylisopropylpotassium as using phenylisopropylpotassium as phenylisopropylpotassium as as initiator. In order to avoid the attack of the ester group of methyl methyl methacrylate (MMA) (MMA) by polystyryl polystyryl carbanions, 1,1-diphenylethylene was introduced prior to the addition was introduced prior to the addition introduced prior to the addition prior to the addition to the addition the addition addition of MMA to decrease the nucleophilicity of the active sites. Samples B4 and BS were prepared by butyllithiuminitiated polymerization of styrene and subsequent addition of methyl methacrylate. 

POLYMER, 1993, Volume 34, Number 19 4101 

**==> picture [276 x 11] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
The critical range of liquid chromatography. 4: H. Pasch et al.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


**==> picture [530 x 724] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
i<br>A wtta B ii" C fH<br>i at ty<br>wt 1! H ‘<br>' \ i! i H<br>- My<br>wy ef! t 1 14<br>Fa) it 'y ta<br>Cc 1 t 4<br>fo) \! |i! is1<br>Q ‘ od ey<br>yy ‘ ' i ’ i!<br>wy ’ 1 t \ ‘ \<br>a a an) roy<br>— ae \ rt<br>~:'<br>'' 4 ' ' ‘<br>ae tl 14<br>1{<br>'<br>U \ \ } \<br>! ‘os '' ’\ \ \ \<br>JA .--/ = U w ua! Se<br>eters Cae SR a 2=----=<br>4.0 45 5.0 4.0 4.5 5.0 4.0 45 5.0<br>RT(x 10! min)<br>® D E<br>W)<br>Cc<br>(eo)<br>[al<br>rT)<br>w<br>a<br>a<br>3.5 40 45 5.0 55<br>RT(x 10'!min)<br>Figure 2 S.e.c. chromatograms of poly(styrene-b-methy] methacrylate)s (—) and their polystyrene precursors (-—-); Ultrastyragel 10°, 2 x 10°,<br>2x 10%, 10° A, THF, flow rate 1 ml min™?. (A) B1, P1; (B) B2, P2; (C) B3, P3; (D) B4; (E) BS<br>Table 1 Manufacturer’s and s.e.c. molar-mass data of the samples<br>Se where the chromatograms of P3 and B3 are well<br>——<br>Manufacturer* Sec. | Sec. 2 separated, in the case of critical chromatography a nice<br>Sample M, M, U M, U overlay i s s obtaobta i ned. Thh i ss isj a very strong indicationoe, for<br>$e our assumption that at the critical point of PMMA the<br>Pl 110.000 100000 1.06 =6109000 1.11 block copolymer behaves like the corresponding PS<br>Bl 165 000 152000 108 153000 1.15 precursor homopolymer. Additional evidence is given by<br>P2 93000 77000 1.03 79000 1.11 a tentative quantification of the chromatograms (see<br>B2 182000 141000115 156000 1.16 Table 2). The calculated molar masses and polydispersities<br>P3 55000 43000‘ 1.11 46000 = 1.21 are of the same magnitude; however, compared with the<br>P3 188 000 140000, tl = 134000 1.21 expected values (see Table 1) the polydispersities are too<br>B4 158.000 152000 1.28 high. This is most obvious for the higher-molar-mass B4.<br>BS 1000 25000 «1.16 The chromatogram of the block copolymer B5 shows<br>a eeFeeSSeeeeeFeSeeeSesSeSFFSSSSSSsSFMMSsMMeseF a bimodal distribution, which was not observed in the<br>Secs. s.e.c. experiment. Probably, differences in polymer<br>neon patystyrene Caran astyrage tO, dSi-1000. MEK structure manifest themselves much more at the critical<br>6.6. polystyrene cabbrasion, Ma arospher Siow andor point. The type of this bimodality, however, may be<br>Table determined only by preparative separation and analysing<br>Si-1002 Molar-mass data from critical chromatography ona Nucleosil the two peaks.<br>stationary phase, with polystyrene calibration The chromatograms of the highest-molar-mass samples<br>Sample M, U P1, B1 and P2, B2 were of distorted shape and had an<br>OO unusual broad distribution. This behaviour indicates that<br>PS 50.000 56.000 1.21 a part of the macromolecules does not fit into the pores<br>P3 42.000 1.38 of the stationary phase and separation takes place near<br>B3 57000 1.38 the exclusion limit. Therefore, all further investigations<br>B4 67 000 2.34 were carried out on a two-column system comprising a<br>BS 14000 5.15 LiChrospher Si-300 and a LiChrospher Si-1000 self-<br>a packed column.<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


4102 POLYMER, 1993, Volume 34, Number 19 

The critical range of liquid chromatography. 4: H. Pasch et al. 

**==> picture [508 x 644] intentionally omitted <==**

**----- Start of picture text -----**<br>
Vol-% MEK<br>100 73 70.7 70.0<br>A ;<br>KA fi 4 -<br>3 4 5 6<br>log M 3 400 420 440 460 480 500 520<br>RT [(sec)]<br>B C Figuremethacrylate);4 CriticalLiChrospher"Si-300"and"Si21000,diagram of logM vs. retention timeMEK~cyclohexane,of poly(methyl<br>flow rate 0.5 ml min™1<br>wu<br>w<br>Cc<br>Q<br>Qa<br>Fa<br>& A B c<br>ra ‘4 i H<br>i im an<br>o H v ! ‘ i<br>“ 4 ‘ ! ' a \<br>3 S 1 ry ro}<br>4 5 6 a. rt ! ros<br>log M & rf ty iS<br>Figure 3. Chromatograms of the block copolymers (——), the &iv oy| osboa 4it<br>polystyrene precursor P3 (-~--) and a PS calibration standard (---) at ES io ' \ i 4<br>the critical point of PMMA; Nucleosil Si-100, MEK-cyclohexane ! \ 4 \ / \<br>73:27 vol%. (A) B3; (B) BS; (C) B4 ! '‘} 1 ? \<br>?\ / \ a \<br>4.5 5.0 5.5 4.0 45 590 55 40 45 5.0<br>For this.. column system, which.. has slightly.. different.. log M<br>silica gel surface characteristics, the mobile phase<br>composition has to be adjusted accordingly, As can be E D<br>seen in Figure 4, the critical point for PMMA PMMA is obtained<br>at a mobile a mobile mobile phase composition of 70 vol% 70 vol% vol% MEK/30 vol% vol%<br>cyclohexane. a<br>The h.plic. analysis of a certain component in a S<br>complex mixture requires an appropriate separation Fi<br>as well as a sensitive detection. The separation is =<br>directed by the stationary and mobile phases of x<br>the chromatographic system, whereas the detection is =)<br>determined by the sensitivity and selectivity of the<br>detector. As for chromatography at the critical point of<br>adsorption of block block copolymers, it has to be assured that<br>separation is accomplished with respect to only one block is accomplished with respect to only one block accomplished with respect to only one block with respect to only one block respect to only one block to only one block only one block one block block 30. 35. 40 45 50 55<br>component. The same criterion must be observed for log M<br>detection, ie. for accurate quantification one block ;<br>component must be selectively detected. The refractive- Figure 5 Chromatograms of the block copolymers (——-) and the<br>ind detector. which is commonly used in se.c.. is polystyrene precursors --) at the critical point of PMMA;<br>™m sex ’ y pen Deke LiChrospher Si-300 and Si-1000, MEK-cyclohexane 70:30 vol%, flow<br>universal and therefore does not fulfil this criterion. For rate 0.5 ml min~?. (A) B1, P1; (B) B2, P2; (C) B3, P3; (D) B4; (E) BS<br>**----- End of picture text -----**<br>


For this.. column system, which.. has slightly.. different.. silica gel surface characteristics, the mobile phase composition has to be adjusted accordingly, As can be seen in Figure 4, the critical point for PMMA PMMA is obtained at a mobile a mobile mobile phase composition of 70 vol% 70 vol% vol% MEK/30 vol% vol% cyclohexane. The h.plic. analysis of a certain component in a complex mixture requires an appropriate separation as well as a sensitive detection. The separation is directed by the stationary and mobile phases of the chromatographic system, whereas the detection is determined by the sensitivity and selectivity of the detector. As for chromatography at the critical point of adsorption of block block copolymers, it has to be assured that separation is accomplished with respect to only one block is accomplished with respect to only one block accomplished with respect to only one block with respect to only one block respect to only one block to only one block only one block one block block component. The same criterion must be observed for detection, ie. for accurate quantification one block component must be selectively detected. The refractiveind detector. which is commonly used in se.c.. is ™m sex ’ y pen Deke universal and therefore does not fulfil this criterion. For poly(styrene-b-methyl methacrylate)s the RI detector gives a response for the PS as well as the PMMA blocks. Accordingly, if the polydispersities of the two blocks differ significantly, quantification will give erroneous results. The most commonly used selective detector is the u.v./vis. photometer, where detection depends on the light absorption characteristics of the components. In our case a measuring wavelength of 280 nm was used, assuring 

that only the PS and not the PMMA block gives a detector response. Figure 5 shows the chromatograms of the block copolymers and their precursors, measured with a column system of silica gel Si-300 and Si-1000 and u.v. detection 

POLYMER, 1993, Volume 34, Number 19 4103 

The critical range of liquid chromatography. 4: H. Pasch et al. 

|Table 3<br>Molar-mass<br>data from<br>critical<br>chromatography|Table 3<br>Molar-mass<br>data from<br>critical<br>chromatography|Table 3<br>Molar-mass<br>data from<br>critical<br>chromatography|Table 3<br>Molar-mass<br>data from<br>critical<br>chromatography|on|a|CONCLUSION|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|LiChrospher|Si-300 and Si-1000|stationary phase,|with polystyrene||||
|calibration<br>TT ieedion <br>RI<br>detection||Sv <br>U.y,|etwtin®<br> detection|||..<br>.<br>Chromatography atthecriticalpoint **o**fadsorption has<br>been shown to be a unique method f r the analysis of<br>diblock copolymers according to the MMD of the|
|Sample<br>M,<br>M,<br>UsOM,<br>M,<br>U<br>ee||||||individual blocks. By operating at the critical point of<br>one block, the other block may be analysed. Using|
|Pl<br>Bl|100000<br>110000<br>104000117000|1.11<br>108000<br>1.12<br>111000|114000<br>119000|1.06<br>1.07||this approach poly(styrene-b-methyl methacrylate)s were<br>analysed according to the MMD of the polystyrene|
|P2<br>B2|71000<br>79000<br>73000<br>87000|111<br>76000<br>1.18<br>85000|81000<br>91000|1.07<br>1.07||block. A comparison with data<br>for the polystyrene<br>precursors gave very good agreement, thereby proving|
|P3|40000<br>47000|118<br>43000|48000)|1.11||the ‘invisibility’ concept.|
|B3|45000<br>59000|1.31<br>54000|61000|1.13|||
|Ba||56000-96000||M17||ACKNOWLEDGEMENT|
|BS<br>4000<br>8000<br>1.89<br>eee||||||;<br>The authors are grateful to J. P. Lingelser from ICS for|
|“At 280nm||||||his valuable assistance in the synthesis of some of the|
|||||||copolymersamples.|



- REFERENCES 

- at 280 nm. Table 3 summarizes the quantitative results 1 Gldckner, G, ‘Gradient HPLC of Copolymers and Chromatoobtained via RI and u.v. (280 nm) detection. In all cases graphic Cross-Fractionation’, Springer, Berlin, 1991 there is very good agreement between the molar masses 2 Gorbunoy, A. A. and Skvortsov, A. M. Vysokomol. Soedin. (A) of the block copolymers and the precursors. In addition, 1988, 30, 895 the data obtained for the precursors are in good 3 Rorunoy, A A. and Skvortsov, A. M. Vysokomol. Soedin. (A) agreement with the molar-mass values from the s.¢.c. 4 Entelis, S. G., Evreinov, V. V. and Gorshkov, A. V. Adv. Polym. experiments. Comparing the molar masses and the Sci. 1986, 76, 129 polydispersities calculated from the RJ and u.v. responses, 5 Entelis, S. G., Evreinov, V. V. and Kuzaev, A. I. ‘Reactive a good agreement is obtained for the molar masses. In Oligomers’, Khimiya, Moscow, 1988 all cases the polydispersities calculated from the RI signal 6 Cen Ay oem V. V. and Entelis, S. G. Zh. Fiz. are gradually increased. This suggests that the influence 7 Pasch, H., Much, H., Schulz, G. and Gorshkov, A. V. LC-GC of the PMMA block on the RI response cannot be Int. 1992, 5, 38 neglected and the application of a selective detector is 8 Pasch, He Brinkmann, C., Much, H. and Just, U. J. Chromatogr. advisable. It is expected that the differences between RI 1992, 623, 315 P and u.v. detection would be much more pronounced when ? Cankina,on“oneren B. and Malakhova, 1. J. Planar block copolymers with a broad MMD and different 10 Zimina, T. M., Kever, J. J., Melenevskaya, E. Y. and Fell, A. F. MMDs of the separate blocks are investigated. J. Chromatogr. 1992, 593, 233 

4104 POLYMER, 1993, Volume 34, Number 19 

